https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-need-to-invest/
Invest in securing your future
The corpus you intend to build at the end of the defined period is sensitive to the return rate the investment generates. A small variation to rate can have a big impact on the corpus.
Choose an instrument that best suits your risk and return appetite.
Equity should be a part of your investment if you want to beat the inflation in the long run

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/regulators/
The stock market is the place to go to if you want to transact in equities.
Stock markets exist electronically and can be accessed through a stockbroker.
There are many different kinds of market participants operating in the stock markets.
Every entity operating in the market has to be regulated, and they can operate only within the framework as prescribed by the regulator.
SEBI is the regulator of the securities market in India. They set the legal framework and regulate all entities interested in operating in the market.
Most importantly you need to remember that SEBI is aware of what you are doing and they can flag you down if you are upto something fishy in the markets!

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/financial-intermediaries/
The market ecosystem is built by a cluster of financial intermediaries, each offering services unique to the functioning of markets.
A stockbroker is your access to markets, so make sure you choose a broker that matches your requirements, and services well.
A stockbroker provides you with a trading account which is used for all market-related transactions (buying and selling of financial instruments like shares)
A Depository is a corporate entity which holds the shares in electronic form, against your name, in your account. Your account with the depository is called the ‘DEMAT’ account.
There are only two depositories in India – NSDL and CDSL.
To open a DEMAT account with one of the depositaries, you need to liaison with a Depository Participant (DP). A DP functions as an agent to the Depository
A clearing corporation works towards clearing and settling of trades executed by you.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-ipo-markets-part-1/
Before understanding why companies go public, it is important to understand the origin of business.
The people who invest in your business in the pre-revenue stage are called Angel Investors.
Angel investors take the maximum risk. They take in as much risk as the promoter.
The money that angels give to start the business is called the seed fund.
Angel’s invest relatively a small amount of capital
Valuation of a company simply signifies how much the company is valued at. When one values the company, they consider the company’s assets and liabilities.
Face value is simply a denominator to indicate how much one share is originally worth.
Authorized shares of the company are the total number of shares that are available with the company.
 The shares distributed from the authorized shares are called the issued shares. Issued shares are always a subset of authorized shares.
The shareholding pattern of a company tells us who owns how much stake in the company.
Venture Capitalists invest at an early stage in business; they do not risk Angel investors. The quantum of investments by a VC is usually somewhere in between an angel and private equity investment.
The money the company spends on business expansion is called capital expenditure or CAPEX
Series A, B, and C, etc., are all funding that the company seeks as they start evolving. Usually higher the series, higher is the investment required.
Beyond a certain size, VCs cannot invest, and hence the company seeking investments will have to approach Private Equity firms.
PE firms invest large sums of money, and they usually invest at a slightly more mature stage of the business.
In terms of risk, PE’s have a lower risk appetite as compared to VC or angels.
Typical PE investors would like to deploy their own people on the investee company’s board to ensure business moves in the right direction.
The valuation of the company increases as and when the business, revenues and profitability increases.
An IPO is a process using which a company can raise fund. The funds raised can be for any valid reason – for CAPEX, restructuring debt, rewarding shareholders, etc

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-ipo-markets-part-2/
Companies go public to raise funds, provide an exit for early investors, reward employees and gain visibility
Merchant banker acts as a key partner with the company during the IPO process
SEBI regulates the  IPO market and has the  final word on whether a company can go public or not
As an investor in the IPO, you should read through the DRHP to know everything about the company
Most of the IPOs in India follow a book-building process

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-stock-markets/
A stock market is a place where a trader or an investor can transact (buy, sell) in shares
A stock market is a place where the buyer and seller meet electronically
Different opinions makes a market
The stock exchange electronically facilitate the meeting of buyers, and sellers
News and events moves the stock prices on a daily basis
Demand supply mismatch also makes the stock prices move
When you own a stock you get corporate privileges like bonus, dividends, rights etc
Holding period is defined as the period during which you hold your shares
Use absolute returns when the holding period is 1 year or less. Use CAGR to identify the growth rate over multiple years
Traders, and investors differ on two counts – risk taking ability and the holding period.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-stock-markets-index/
 An index acts as a barometer of the whole economy.
An index going up indicates that the market participants are optimistic.
An index going down indicates that the market participants are pessimistic.
There are two main indices in India – The BSE Sensex and NSE’s Nifty
 An index can be used for a variety of purposes – information, benchmarking, trading and hedging.
 Index trading is probably the most popular use of the index.
India follows the free-float market capitalization method to construct the index.
 There are sector-specific indices which convey the sentiment of specific sectors.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-trading-terminal/
A trading terminal is your gateway to markets. You must know the operations of a trading terminal if you aspire to become an active trader.
You can load the stock you are interested in on the market watch to track all the relevant information.
Some of the basic information on a market watch is – LTP, % change, OHLC, and volumes.
To buy a stock, you need to invoke a buy order form by pressing ‘B’ key. Likewise, to sell a stock you need to invoke a sell order form by pressing ‘S’ key.
You choose a limit order type when you are keen on transacting at a particular price; else you can opt for a market order.
You choose CNC as product type if you want to buy and hold the stock across multiple days. If you want to trade intraday, you choose NRML or MIS.
An order book lets you track orders that are both open and completed. You can modify the open orders by clicking on the modify button at the order book’s bottom.
Once the order is completed, you can view the trade details in the trade book. In the case of a market order, you can view the exact trade price by accessing the trade book.
You can press the F6 key to invoke the market depth or snap quote window. The market watch enables you to see bid and ask prices.
The bid & ask prices refer to the price at which you can transact. By default, the top 5 bid and ask prices are displayed in the market depth window at all times.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/clearing-and-settlement-process/
The day you make a transaction, it is called the trade date, represented as ‘T Day.’
The broker is required to issue you a contract note for all the transactions carried out by the end of T day.
When you buy a share, the same will be reflected in your DEMAT account by the end of T+2 day.
All equity/stock settlements in India happen on a T+2 basis.
When you sell shares, the shares are blocked immediately and the sale proceeds credited again on T +2 day

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/five-corporate-actions-and-its-impact-on-stock-prices/
Corporate actions have an impact on stock prices.
Dividends are a means of rewarding shareholders. The dividend is announced as a percentage of the face value.
If you aspire to get the dividend, you need to own the stock before the ex-dividend date.
A bonus issue is a form of the stock dividend. This is the company’s way of rewarding the shareholders with additional shares.
A stock split is done based on the face value. The face value and the stock price changes in proportion to the change in face value
A rights issue is a way through which the company raises fresh capital from the existing shareholders. Subscribe to it only if you think it makes sense
Buyback signals a positive outlook of the promoters. This also conveys to the shareholders that the promoters are optimistic about the company’s prospects.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/key-events-and-their-impact-on-markets/
Markets and individual stocks react to events. Market participants should equip themselves to understand and decipher these events.
Monetary policy is one of the most important economic events. During the monetary policy, review actions on a repo, reverse repo, CRR etc. are initiated.
Interest rates and inflation are related. Increasing interest rates curbs inflation and vice versa
Inflation data is released every month by MOSPI. As a consumer, CPI inflation data is what you need to track.
IIP measures industrial production activity. Increase in IIP cheers the markets, and lower IIP disappoints the market.
PMI is a survey-based business sentiment indicator. The PMI number oscillates around the 50 marks. Above 50 is good news to markets, and PMI below 50 is not.
The Budget is an important market event where policy announcements and reform initiatives are taken. Markets and stocks react strongly to budget announcements.
Corporate earnings are reported every quarter. Stocks react mainly due to the variance in actual number versus the street’s expectation.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/background/
Technical Analysis is a popular method to develop a point of view on markets. Besides, TA also helps in identifying entry and exit points.
Technical Analysis visualizes the actions of market participants in the form of stock charts.
Patterns are formed within the charts, and these patterns help a trader identify trading opportunities.
TA works best when we keep a few core assumptions in perspective.
TA is used best to identify short terms trades

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/introducing-technical-analysis/
Its scope does not bind technical Analysis. The TA concepts can be applied across any asset classes as long as it has a time-series data.
TA is based on a few core assumptions.
Markets discount everything
The how is more important than why
Price moves in trends
History tends to repeat itself.
A good way to summarize the daily trading action is by marking the open, high, low and close prices usually abbreviated as OHLC

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/chart-types/
Conventional chart type cannot be used for technical analysis as we need to plot 4 data points simultaneously.
A line chart can be used to interpret trends, but no other information can be derived.
Bar charts lack visual appeal, and one cannot identify patterns easily. For this reason, bar charts are not very popular.
There are two types of candlesticks – Bullish candle and Bearish candle. The structure of the candlestick, however, remains the same.
When close > open = It is a Bullish candle. When close < open = It is a Bearish candle.
Time frames play a very crucial role in defining trading success. One has to choose this carefully.
The number of candle increases as and when the frequency increases
Traders should be in a position to discard noise from relevant information

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/getting-started-candlesticks/
History tends to repeat itself – we modified this assumption by adding the factor angle.
Candlestick patterns can be broken down into single and multiple candlestick patterns.
There are three important assumptions specific to candlestick patterns.
Buy strength and sell weakness.
Be flexible – quantify and verify.
Look for a prior trend.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/single-candlestick-patterns-part-1/
Remember the rules based on which candlesticks work.
Marubozu is the only pattern which violates rule number 3, i.e. Look for the prior trend.
A bullish marubozu indicates bullishness.
Buy around the closing price of a bullish marubozu
Keep the low of the marubozu as the stoploss
A bearish marubozu indicates bearishness.
Sell around the closing price of a bearish marubozu
Keep the high of the marubozu as the stoploss
An aggressive trader can place the trade on the same day as the pattern forms.
Risk-averse traders can place the trade on the next day after ensuring that it obeys rule number 1, i.e. Buy strength, and Sell weakness.
Abnormal candle lengths should not be traded.
Short candle indicates subdued activity.
Long candle indicates extreme activity; however, placing stoploss becomes an issue.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/single-candlestick-patterns-part-2/
A spinning top has a small real body. The upper and lower shadows are almost equal in length.
The colour of the spinning top does not matter. What matters is the fact that the open and close prices are very close to each other.
Spinning tops convey indecision in the market with both bulls and bears being in equal control.
Spinning top at the top end of the rally indicates that either the bulls are pausing before they can resume the uptrend further or the bears are preparing to break the trend. In either case, the trader’s stance has to be cautious. If the trader intends to buy, he is better off buying only half the quantity, and he should wait for the markets to move in his direction.
Spinning top at the bottom end of the rally indicates that either the bears are pausing before they can resume the downtrend further or the bulls are preparing to break the trend and take the markets higher. Either case, the trader’s stance has to be cautious. If the traders intend to buy, he is better off buying only half the quantity, and he should wait for the markets to make a move.
Doji’s are very similar to spinning tops. Doji also conveys indecision in the market. By definition, dojis do not have a real body. However, in reality, even if a wafer-thin body appears, it is acceptable.
A trader’s stance based on dojis is similar to the stance taken when a spinning top occurs.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/single-candlestick-patterns-part-3/
A paper umbrella has a long lower shadow and a small real body. The lower shadow and the real body should maintain the ‘shadow to real body’ ratio. In the case of the paper umbrella, the lower shadow should be at least twice the real body’s length.
Since the open and close prices are close to each other, the paper umbrella’s colour should not matter.
If a paper umbrella appears at the bottom of a downtrend, it is called the ‘hammer.’
If the paper umbrella appears at the top end of an uptrend, it is called the hanging man.
The hammer is a bullish pattern, and one should look at buying opportunities when it appears.
The low of the hammer acts as the stop-loss price trade.
The hanging man is a bearish pattern which appears at the top end of the trend, and one should look at selling opportunities when it appears.
The high of the hanging man acts as the stop loss price for the trade.
The shooting star is a bearish pattern which appears at the top end of the trend. One should look at shorting opportunities when a shooting star appears.
The high of the shooting star will be the stop loss price for the trade.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/multiple-candlestick-patterns-part-1/
Multiple candlestick patterns evolve over two or more trading days.
The bullish engulfing pattern evolves over two trading days. It appears at the bottom end of a downtrend. Day one is called P1, and day 2 is called P2.
In a bullish engulfing pattern, P1 is a red candle, and P2 is a blue candle. P2’s blue candle completely engulfs P1’s red candle.
A risk-taker initiates a long trade at the close of P2 after ensuring P1 and P2 together form a bullish engulfing pattern. A risk-averse trader will initiate the trade the day after P2, near the close of the day.
The stoploss for the bullish engulfing pattern is the lowest low between P1 and P2.
The bearish engulfing pattern appears at the top end of an uptrend. P2’s red candle completely engulfs P1’s blue candle.
A risk-taker initiates a short trade at the close of P2 after ensuring P1 and P2 together form a bearish engulfing pattern. The risk-averse trader will initiate the trade the day after P2, after confirming the day forms a red candle.
The highest high of P1 and P2 forms the stoploss for a bearish engulfing pattern
The presence of a doji after an engulfing pattern tends to catalyze the pattern’s evolution.
The piercing pattern works very similarly to the bullish engulfing pattern, except that P2’s blue candle engulfs at least 50% and below 100% of P1’s red candle.
The dark cloud cover works similar to the bearish engulfing pattern, except that P2’s red candle engulfs at least 50% and below 100% of P1’s blue candle.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/multiple-candlestick-patterns-part-2/
The harami pattern evolves over 2 trading sessions – P1 and P2.
Day 1 (P1) of the pattern forms a long candle and day 2(P2) of the pattern forms a small candle which appears as if it has been tucked inside the P1’s long candle.
A bullish harami candle pattern is formed at the lower end of a downtrend. P1 is a long red candle, and P2 is a small blue candle. The idea is to initiate a long trade near the close of P2 (risk taker). A risk-averse trader will initiate the long trade near the close of the day after P2 only after ensuring it forms a blue candle day.
The stop loss on a bullish harami pattern is the lowest low price between P1 and P2.
The bearish harami pattern is formed at the top end of an uptrend. P1 is a long blue candle, and P2 is a small red candle. The idea is to initiate a short trade near the close of P2 (risk taker). The risk-averse will initiate the short near the day’s close only after ensuring it is a red candle day.
The stop loss on a bearish harami pattern is the highest high price between P1 and P2.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/multiple-candlestick-patterns-part-3/
Star formation occurs over three trading sessions. The candle of P2 is usually a doji or a spinning top.
If there is a doji on P2 in a star pattern, it is called a doji star (morning doji star, evening doji star) else it is just called the star pattern (morning star, evening star)
Morning star is a bullish pattern which occurs at the bottom end of the trend. The idea is to go long on P3 with the lowest low pattern being the stop loss for the trade.
The evening star is a bearish pattern, which occurs at the top end of an uptrend. The idea is to go short on P3, with the highest pattern acting as a stop loss.
The star formation evolves over a 3 days period. Hence both the risk-averse and risk taker are advised to initiate the trade on P3.
Candlesticks portray the traders thought process. One should nurture this thought process as he dwells deeper into the candlestick study

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/support-resistance/
S&R are price points on the chart
Support is a price point below the current market price that indicate buying interest.
Resistance is a price point above the current market price that indicate selling interest.
To identify S&R, place a horizontal line in such a way that it connects at least 3 price action zones, well-spaced in time. The more number of price action zones (well spaced in time) the horizontal line connects, the stronger is S&R
S&R can be used to identify targets for the trade. For a long trade, look for the immediate resistance level as the target. For a short trade, look for the immediate support level as the target.
Lastly, comply with the checklist for optimal trading results

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/volumes/
Volumes are used to confirm a trend
100 share buy and 100 shares sell the total volume 100, not 200
The end of day volumes indicates the cumulative volume across trades executed throughout the day
High volumes indicate the presence of smart money
Low volumes indicate retail participation
When you initiate a trade to either go long or short always make sure if volumes confirm
Avoid trading on low volume days

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/moving-averages/
A standard average calculation is a quick approximation of a series of numbers
In an average calculation where the latest data is included, and the oldest is excluded called a Moving Average
The simple moving average (SMA) gives equal weightage to all data points in the series
An exponential moving average (EMA) scales the data according to its newness. Recent data gets the maximum weightage, and the oldest gets the least weightage
For all practical purposes, use an EMA as opposed to SMA. This is because the EMA gives more weightage to the most recent data points
The outlook is bullish when the current market price is greater than the EMA. The outlook turns bearish when the current market price turns lesser than the EMA
In a non-trending market, moving averages may result in whipsaws, thereby causing frequent losses. To overcome this, an EMA crossover system is adopted
In a typical crossover system, the price chart is overlaid with two EMAs. The shorter EMA is faster to react, while the longer EMA is slower to react
The outlook turns bullish when the faster EMA crosses and is above the slower EMA. Hence one should look at buying the stock. The trade lasts upto a point where the faster EMA starts going below, the slower EMA
The longer the time frame one chooses for a crossover system, the lesser the trading signals.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/indicators-part-1/
Indicators are independent trading systems developed and introduced by successful traders.
Indicators are leading or lagging. Leading indicators signal the possible occurrence of an event. Lagging indicators, on the other hand, confirms an ongoing trend.
RSI is a momentum oscillator which oscillates between 0 and 100 level
A value between 0 and 30 is considered oversold. Hence the trader should look at buying opportunities.
A value between 70 and 100 is considered overbought. Hence the trader should look at selling opportunities.
If the RSI value is fixed in a region for a prolonged period, it indicates excess momentum. Hence, instead of taking a reversed position, the trader can consider initiating a trade in the same direction.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/indicators-part-2/
A MACD is a trend following system
MACD consists of a 12 Day, 26 day EMA
MACD line is 12d EMA – 26d EMA
The signal line is the 9 day SMA of the MACD line
A crossover strategy can be applied between the MACD Line and the signal line
The Bollinger band captures the volatility. It has a 20-day average, a +2 SD, and a -2 SD
One can short when the current price is at +2SD with an expectation that the price reverts to the average
One can go long when the current price is at -2SD with an expectation that the price reverts to the average
BB works well in a sideways market. In a trending market, the BB’s envelope expands and generates many false signals
Indicators are good to know, but it should not be treated as a single source for decision making.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/fibonacci-retracements/
The Fibonacci series forms the basis for Fibonacci retracement
A Fibonacci series has many mathematical properties. These mathematical properties are prevalent in many aspects of nature.
Traders believe the Fibonacci series has its application in stock charts as it identified potential retracement levels.
Fibonacci retracements are levels (61.8%, 38.2%, and 23.6% ) upto which a stock can retrace before it resumes the original directional move.
At the Fibonacci retracement level, the trader can look at initiating a new trade. However, before initiating the trade, other points in the checklist should also confirm.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/dow-theory-part-1/
Dow Theory was used in the western world even before candlesticks were formally introduced.
Dow Theory works on 9 basic tenets.
The market can be viewed in 3 basic phases – accumulation, mark up, and distribution phase.
The accumulation phase is when the institutional investor (smart money) enters the market, mark up phase is when traders make an entry. The final distribution phase is when the larger public enter the market.
What follows the distribution phase is the markdown phase, following which the accumulation phase will complete the circle.
The Dow theory has a few basic patterns, which are best used in conjunction with candlesticks.
The double and triple formations are reversal patterns, which are quite effective.
The interpretation of double and triple formations are the same

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/dow-theory-part-2/
A range is formed when the stock oscillates between the two price points.
A trader can buy at the lower price point, and sell at a higher price point.
The stock gets into a range for a specific reason such as the lack of fundamental triggers, or event expectation.
The stock can break out of the range. A good breakout is characterized by above-average volumes and a sharp surge in prices.
If the trader has missed an opportunity to buy a stock, the flag formation offers another window to buy
RRR is a critical parameter for trade evaluation. Develop a minimum RRR threshold based on your risk appetite
Before initiating a trade, the trader should look at the opportunity from the Dow Theory perspective.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/finale-helping-get-started/
If you aspire to become a technical trader, ensure you equip yourself with good charting software. Zerodha’s Pi is my preference.
Choose EOD chart for both day trading and swing trading.
Look at intraday charts if you like scalping the markets.
The lookback period should be at least 6 months to 1 year for swing trading.
Nifty 50 is a great opportunity universe, to begin with
The opportunity scanning can be done in 2 parts.
Part 1 involves skimming through the charts of all the stocks in opportunity universe and shortlisting those charts that display a recognizable candlestick pattern.
Part 2 involves investigating the shortlisted charts to figure out if they comply with the checklist.
Scalping is advisable for seasoned swing traders

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/supplementary-notes-1/

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-central-pivot-range/
You can trade from the chart by selecting the trade button.
The trade button is a floating window which you can place anywhere on the chart.
The candle pattern helps identify the candlestick patterns, use this to reconfirm the pattern.
CPR helps you identify the S&R pattern
It is considered bullish if the current market price is higher than the TC line.
It is considered bearish if the current market price below the BC line.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/introduction-fundamental-analysis/
Fundamental Analysis is used to make long term investments.
Investment in a company with good fundamentals creates wealth.
Using Fundamental Analysis, one can separate an investment-grade company from a junk company.
All investment-grade companies exhibit a few common traits. Likewise, all junk companies exhibit common traits.
Fundamental analysis helps the analysts identify these traits.
Both Technical analysis and fundamental analysis should coexist as a part of your market strategy.
To become a fundamental analyst, one does not require any special skill. Common sense, basic mathematics, and a bit of business sense are all that is required.
A core-satellite approach to capital allocation is a prudent market strategy.
The tools required for FA are generally fundamental; most of these tools are available for free.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/mindset-investor/
The mindset of a trader and an investor is different.
The investor has to develop an investment mindset if he is serious about investing.
The investor should stay invested for a long period of time for the returns to compound.
The speed at which the money doubles increases drastically the more time you stay invested. This is one of the properties of compounding.
Every investment has to be evaluated on two aspects – qualitative & quantitative.
Qualitative aspects revolve around the non-numeric information related to the company.
The quantitative aspects involve analyzing numeric data. The financial statements are an important source of finding quantitative data.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/read-annual-report-company/
The Annual Report (AR) of a company is an official communication from the company to its investors and other stakeholders.
The AR is the best source to get information about the company; hence AR should be the default choice for the investor to source company-related information.
The AR contains many sections, with each section highlighting a certain aspect of the business.
The AR is also the best source to get information related to the qualitative aspects of the company.
The management discussion and analysis is one of the most important sections in the AR. It has the management’s perspective on the country’s overall economy, their outlook on the industry they operate in for the year gone by (what went right and what went wrong), and what they foresee for the year ahead.
The AR contains three financial statements – Profit & Loss Statement, Balance Sheet, and Cash Flow statement.
The standalone statement contains the financial numbers of only the company into consideration. However, the consolidated numbers contain the company and its subsidiaries financial numbers.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/understanding-pl-statement-part1/
The financial statement provides information and conveys the financial position of the company.
A complete set of financial statements include the Profit & Loss Account, Balance Sheet and Cash Flow Statement.
A fundamental Analyst is a financial statement user, and he needs to know what the maker of the financial statements states.
The profit and loss statement gives the profitability of the company for the year under consideration.
The P&L statement is an estimate, as the company can revise the numbers at a later point. Also, by default, companies publish data for the current year and the previous year, side by side.
The revenue side of the P&L is also called the top line of the company.
Revenue from operations is the main source of revenue for the company.
Other operating income includes revenue incidental to the business.
The other income includes revenue from non-operating sources.
The sum of revenue from operations (net of duty), other operating income, and other incomes gives the ‘Net Revenue from Operations’

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/understanding-pl-statement-part2/
The P&L statement’s expense statement contains information on all the expenses incurred by the company during the financial year.
Each expense can be studied concerning a note which you can explore for further information.
Depreciation and amortization is a way of spreading the cost of an asset over its useful life.
The cost of interest and other charges paid when the company borrows money for its capital expenditure.
PBT = Total Revenue – Total Expense – Exceptional items (if any)
Net PAT = PBT – applicable taxes
EPS reflects the earning capacity of a company on a per-share basis. Earnings are profit after tax and preferred dividends.
EPS = PAT / Total number of outstanding ordinary shares

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/understanding-balance-sheet-statement-part-1/
A Balance sheet also called the Statement of Financial Position is prepared on a flow basis that depicts the company’s financial position at any given point in time. It is a statement which shows what the company owns ( assets) and what the company owes (liabilities)
A business will generally need a balance sheet when it seeks investors, applies for loans, submits taxes etc.
Balance sheet equation is Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ Equity.
Liabilities are obligations or debts of a business from past transactions, and Share capital is the number of shares * face value.
Reserves are the funds earmarked for a specific purpose, which the company intends to use in future.
The surplus is where the profits of the company reside. This is one of the points where the balance sheet and the P&L interact. Dividends are paid out of the surplus.
Shareholders’ equity = Share capital + Reserves + Surplus. Equity is the claim of the owners on the assets of the company. It represents the assets that remain after deducting the liabilities if you rearrange the Balance Sheet equation, Equity = Assets – Liabilities.
Non-current liabilities or the long-term liabilities are expected to be settled in not less than 365 days or 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax liabilities arise due to the discrepancy in the way the depreciation is treated. Deferred tax liabilities are amounts of income taxes payable in the future concerning taxable differences as per accounting books and tax books.
Current liabilities are the company’s obligations to settle within 365 days /12 months of the balance sheet date.
In most cases, both long and short term provisions are liabilities dealing with employee-related matters
Total Liability = Shareholders’ Funds + Non-Current Liabilities + Current Liabilities. . Thus, total liabilities represent the total amount of money the company owes to others

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/understanding-balance-sheet-statement-part-2/
The Assets side of the Balance sheet displays all the assets the company owns
Assets are expected to give an economic benefit during its useful life.
Assets are classified as Non-current and Current asset.
The useful life of Non-current assets is expected to last beyond 365 days or 12 months.
Current assets are expected to pay off within 365 days or 12 months.
Assets inclusive of depreciation are called the ‘Gross Block.’
Net Block = Gross Block – Accumulated Depreciation
The sum of all assets should equal the sum of all liabilities. Only then the Balance sheet is said to have balanced.
The Balance sheet and P&L statement are inseparable. They are connected in many ways.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/cash-flow-statement/
The Cash flow statement gives us a picture of the true cash position of the company.
A legitimate company has three main activities – operating activities, investing activities and the financing activities.
Each activity either generates or drains money for the company.
The company’s net cash flow is the sum of operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities.
Investors should specifically look at the cash flow from operating activities of the company.
When the liabilities increase, cash level increases and vice versa
When the assets increase, cash level decreases and vice versa.
The net cash flow number for the year is also reflected in the balance sheet.
The Statement of Cash flow is a useful addition to a company’s financial statements because it indicates the company’s performance.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/financial-ratio-analysis/
A Financial ratio is a useful financial metric of a company. On its own merit, the ratio conveys very little information
It is best to study the ratio’s recent trend or compare it with the company’s peers to develop an opinion
Financial ratios can be categorized into ‘Profitability’, ‘Leverage’, ‘Valuation’, and ‘Operating’ ratios. Each of these categories gives the analyst a certain view on the company’s business
EBITDA is the amount of money the company makes after subtracting the operational expenses of the company from its operating revenue
EBITDA margin indicates the percentage profitability of the company at the operating level
PAT margin gives the overall profitability of the firm
Return on Equity (ROE) is a precious ratio. It indicates how much return the shareholders are making over their initial investment in the company
A high ROE and high debt is not a great sign
DuPont Model helps in decomposing the ROE into different parts, with each part throwing light on different aspects of the business
DuPont method is probably the best way to calculate the ROE of a firm
Return on Assets is an indicator of how efficiently the company is utilizing its assets
Return on Capital employed indicates the overall return the company generates considering both the equity and debt.
For the ratios to be useful, it should be analyzed compared to other companies in the same industry.
Also, ratios should be analyzed both at a single point in time and as an indicator of broader trends over time

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/financial-ratios-part-2/
Leverage ratios include Interest Coverage, Debt to Equity, Debt to Assets and the Financial Leverage ratios
The Leverage ratios mainly study the company’s debt with respect to the company’s ability to service the long term debt
Interest coverage ratio inspects the company’s earnings ability (at the EBIT level) as a multiple of its finance costs
Debt to equity ratio measures the amount of equity capital with respect to the debt capital. Debt to equity of 1 implies equal amount of debt and equity
Debt to Asset ratio helps us understand the asset financing structure of the company (especially with respect to the debt)
The Financial Leverage ratio helps us understand the extent to which the assets are financed by the owner’s equity
The Operating Ratios also referred to as the Activity ratios include – Fixed Assets Turnover, Working Capital turnover, Total Assets turnover, Inventory turnover, Inventory number of days, Receivable turnover and Day Sales Outstanding ratios
The Fixed asset turnover ratio measures the extent of the revenue generated in comparison to its investment in fixed assets
Working capital turnover ratio indicates how much revenue the company generates for every unit of working capital
Total assets turnover indicates the company’s ability to generate revenues with the given amount of assets
Inventory turnover ratio indicates how many times the company replenishes its inventory during the year
Inventory number of days represents the number of days the company takes to convert its inventory to cash
A high inventory turnover and therefore a low inventory number of days is a great combination
However make sure this does not come at the cost of low production capacity
The Receivable turnover ratio indicates how many times in a given period the company receives money from its debtors and customers
The Days sales outstanding (DSO) ratio indicates the Average cash collection period i.e the time lag between the Billing and Collection

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/financial-ratios-part-3/
Valuation, in general, is the estimate of the ‘worth’ of something.
Valuation ratios involve inputs from both the P&L statement and the Balance Sheet.
The Price to Sales ratio compares the company’s stock price with the company’s sales per share.
Sales per share is simply the Sales divided by the Number of shares.
Sales of a company with a higher profit margin are more valuable than the sales of a company with lower profit margins.
If a company is going bankrupt, the ‘Book Value’ of a firm is simply the amount of money left on the table after the company pays off its obligations.
Book value is usually expressed on a per-share basis.
The Price/BV indicates how many times the stock price is trading over and above the firm’s book value.
EPS measures the profitability of a company on a per-share basis
The P/E ratio indicates market participants’ willingness to pay for a stock, keeping the company’s earnings in perspective.
One has to be cautious about earning manipulation while evaluating the P/E ratio.
The Indices have a valuation which can be measured by the P/E, P/B or Dividend Yield ratio.
It is advisable to exercise caution when the Index is trading at a valuation of 22x or above.
A valuation gets attractive when the index is trading at 16x or below.
NSE publishes the index valuations on their website daily

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/investment-due-diligence/
A stock idea can come from any source.
Circle of competence and General observation is a great way to start.
It is advisable to have a watch list which includes stocks that look interesting.
Once a stock is identified, we should look for sustainable moats.
The due diligence process involves understanding the business, running the checklist to understand its financial performance, and the valuation exercise.
When it comes to an understanding the business, one should be completely thorough with the company’s business operation.
The checklist should be improvised as and when the investor gains investment experience.
The DCF method is one of the best techniques to identify the intrinsic value of the business

‘Limited Resource’ Equity Research can be performed in 3 stages: Understanding the Business, Application of the checklist, Valuations
The objective of stage 1, i.e. understanding the business requires us to gather all business information. The best way to go about this is the Q&A way
In the Q&A way, we begin with posting some simple and straightforward questions for which we find answers
By the time we finish stage 1, we should be through with all the information related to the business
Most of the answers required in stage 1 are present in the company’s annual report and website
Do you remember while researching the company in stage 1, if there is something not very convincing about the company, it is often a good idea to stop researching further
You need to get convinced (based on facts) about the company in stage 1. This is how you will develop a strong conviction to stay put during bear markets
Stage 2 of Equity Research requires you to evaluate the performance of the company on various counts.
You will proceed to stage 3 only after the company clears in stage 1 & 2.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/dcf-primer/
A valuation model, such as the DCF model helps us estimate the price of a stock.
The DCF model is made up of several interwoven financial concepts.
The ‘Time Value of Money’ is one of the most crucial concepts in finance, as it finds its application in several financial concepts, including the DCF method.
The value of money cannot be treated the same across the time scale – which means the value of money in today’s terms is not really the same at some point in the future.
To compare money across time, we have to ‘time travel the money’ after accounting for the opportunity cost.
Future Value of money is the estimation of the value of money we have today at some point in the future.
The present value of money estimates the value of money receivable in the future in terms of today’s value.
The Net Present Value (NPV) of money is the sum of all the present values of the future cash flows.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/equity-research-part-2/
The free cash flow (FCF) for the company is calculated by deducting the capital expenditures from the net cash from operating activates.
The free cash flow tracks the money left over for the investors.
The latest year FCF is used to forecast the future year’s cash flow.
The growth rate at which the FCF is grown has to be conservative.
The terminal growth rate is when the company’s cash flow is supposed to grow beyond the terminal year.
The terminal value is the value of the company’s cash flow from the terminal year upto infinity.
The future cash flow, including the terminal value, has to be discounted back to today’s value.
The sum of all the discounted cash flows (including the terminal value) is the total net present value of cash flows.
From the total net present value of cash flows, the net debt has to be adjusted. Dividing this by the total number of shares gives us the per-share value of the company.
One needs to accommodate for modelling errors by including a 10% band around the share price.
By including a 10% leeway, we create an intrinsic value band.
Stock trading below the range is considered a good buy, while the stock price above the intrinsic value band is considered expensive.
Wealth is created by long term ownership of undervalued stocks.
Thus, the DCF analysis helps the investors identify whether the company’s current share price is justified.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/background-forwards-market/
The forwards’ contract lays down the basic foundation for a futures contract.
A Forward is an OTC derivative, which is not traded on an exchange.
Forward contracts are private agreements whose terms vary from one contract to the other.
The structure of a forwards contract is fairly simple.
In a forward agreement, the party agreeing to buy the asset is called the “Buyer of the Forwards Contract.”
In a forward agreement, the party agreeing to sell the asset is called the “Seller of the Forwards Contract.”
A variation in the price would impact both the buyer and the seller of the forwards’ contract.
Settlement takes place in two ways in a forward contract – Physical and Cash settlement.
A futures contract reduces the risk of a forward contract.
The core of a forward and futures contract is the same.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/introducing-futures-contract/
The forwards and futures markets give you a financial benefit if you have an accurate directional view of an asset’s price.
The Futures contract is an improvisation over the Forwards contract.
The Futures price generally mimics the underlying price in the spot market.
Unlike a forwards contract, the futures contract is tradable.
The futures contract is a standardized contract wherein all the variables of the agreement is predetermined.
Futures contracts are time-bound, and the contracts are available over different timeframes.
Most of the futures contracts are cash-settled
SEBI in India regulates the futures market.
The lot size is the minimum quantity specified in the futures contract.
Contract value = Lot size times the Futures price.
To enter into a futures agreement, one has to deposit a margin amount, a certain % of the contract value.
Every futures contract has an expiry date beyond which the contract would seize to exist. Upon expiry, old contracts cease and new ones are created.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/futures-trade/
If you have a directional view on an assets price, you can financially benefit from it by entering into a futures agreement.
To transact in a futures contract, one needs to deposit a token advance called the margin.
When we transact in a futures contract, we digitally sign the agreement with the counterparty; this obligates us to honour the contract.
The futures price and the spot price of an asset are different; this is attributable to the futures pricing formula (we will discuss this topic later)
One lot refers to the minimum number of shares that needs to be transacted.
Once we enter into a futures agreement, there is no obligation to stick to the agreement until the contract expires.
Every futures trade requires a margin amount; the margins are blocked when you enter a futures trade.
We can exit the agreement anytime, which means you can exit the agreement within seconds of entering the agreement.
When we square off an agreement, we are essentially transferring the risk to someone else.
Once we square off the futures position, margins are unblocked.
The money that you make or lose in a futures transaction is credited or debited to your trading account the same day.
In a futures contract, the buyer’s gain is the seller’s loss and vice versa.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/leverage-payoff/
Leverage plays a key role in futures trading.
Margins allow us to deposit a small amount of money and take exposure to a large value transaction.
Margins charged is usually a % of the contract value.
Spot market transactions are not leveraged; we can transact to the extent of our capital.
Under leverage, a small change in the underlying results in a massive impact on the P&L
The profits made by the buyer is equivalent to the loss made by the seller and vice versa.
The higher the leverage, the higher is the risk and, therefore, the higher the chance of making money.
Futures Instrument simply allows one to transfer money from one pocket to another. Hence it is called a “Zero Sum Game.”
The payoff structure of a futures instrument is linear.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/margin-m2m/
A margin payment is required (which will be blocked by your broker) as long as the futures trade is live.
The margin blocked by the broker at the time of initiating the futures trade is called the initial margin.
Both the buyer and the seller of the futures agreement will have to deposit the initial margin amount.
The margin amount collected acts as leverage, as it allows you to deposit a small amount of money and take exposure to a large value transaction.
M2M is a simple accounting adjustment; the process involves crediting or debiting the daily obligation money in your trading account based on how the futures price behaves.
The previous day closing price figure is taken to calculate the current day’s M2M.
SPAN Margin is the margin collected as per the exchanges instruction, and the Exposure Margin is collected as per the broker’s requirement
The SPAN and Exposure Margin are determined as per the norms of the exchange.
The SPAN Margin is popularly referred to as the Maintenance Margin.
If the margin account goes below the SPAN, the investor must deposit more cash into his account if he aspires to carry forward the future position.
The Margin Call is when the broker requests the trader to infuse the required margin money when the cash balance goes below the required level.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/margin-calculator-part-1/
Zerodha’s margin calculator is a simple tool that lets you calculate the margin required for a futures contract.
The margin calculator has many versatile features inbuilt.
The margin calculator gives the split up between the SPAN and Exposure margin.
At any given point, NSE ensures there are three contracts of the same underlying, which expire on 3 different (but consecutive) months.
A trader can choose the contract of his choice based on the expiry date.
The contract belonging to the present month is called ‘Current Month Contract’, the next month contract is called ‘Mid Month’, and the 3rd one is called “Far Month Contract.’
On every expiry, the current month contract expires and a new far month contract is introduced. In the process, the mid-month contract would graduate to the current month contract.
A calendar spread is a trading technique which involves buying a certain month contract and selling another month contract simultaneously for the same underlying.
When a calendar spread is initiated, the margins required are lower since the risk is drastically reduced.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/margin-calculator-part-2/
The more information one conveys to the RMS system in terms of trade duration and stoploss; the lesser is the margin requirement.
Use NRML product type when you want to initiate a trade and carry it overnight.
NRML margins are the highest (SPAN + Exposure)
MIS is a pure intraday trade. Hence the MIS margin is lesser than the NRML margin.
In an MIS trade, only time information is conveyed (intraday) but not the information about the stoploss
A cover order (CO) is also an intraday product; besides, in a CO, one has to specify the stoploss
A CO conveys both the time and the SL information. Hence margins are lesser than MIS.
The margins for a Bracket Order (BO) is similar to a CO.
In a BO product type, one can specify both the SL and target price at one go. Besides, one can also trail the stop loss.
A trailing SL technique requires one to adjust the SL and when the script moves in favour of the trade.
A trailing SL is a great way to ride the momentum in a script.
There are no fixed trailing rules; one can choose the trailing SL based on the market situation.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/shorting/
Shorting requires us to sell first and buy later
Short trade is profitable only when the closing price is lower than the entry price
When the price goes higher than the price at which one has shorted, then there would be a loss
The stoploss in a short trade is always higher than the price at which one has shorted
One can only short on an intraday basis in the spot market
The short positions cannot be carried overnight in the spot market
The short position in the futures market can be carried forward overnight
The margins requirement for both short and long trades are similar
The M2M computation is also similar for both short and long trades

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/nifty-futures/
Nifty Futures derives its value based on the Nifty Index in spot, which is its underlying
At present, the Nifty futures lot size is 75
The Nifty futures is the most liquid futures contract in India
Just like other future contracts, Nifty Futures contracts are also available with three different expiry options (Current month, Mid Month, and Far Month)
A round trip trade is an arbitrary quick instantaneous trade which involves buying at the best available sell price and selling at the best available buy price
A round trip trade always results in a loss
Impact cost measures the loss of a round trip as a % of average of bid and ask
Higher the impact cost, lesser the liquidity and vice versa
When you place a market order to transact, you may lose some money owing to impact cost
Nifty has an impact cost close to 0.0082%, which makes it the most liquid contract to trade

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/futures-pricing/
The futures pricing formula states that the Futures Price = Spot price *(1+Rf (x/365)) – d
The difference between futures and spot is called the basis or simply the spread
The futures price as estimated by the pricing formula is called the “Theoretical fair value”
The price at which the futures trade in the market is called the ‘market value’
The theoretical fair value of futures and market value by and large should be around the same value. However there could be slight variance mainly due to the associated costs
If the futures is rich to spot then the futures is said to be at premium else it is said to be at a discount
In commodity parlance Premium = Contango and Discount = Backwardation
Cash and carry is a spread where one can buy in the spot and sell in the futures
Calendar spread is an extension of a cash and carry where one buys a contract and simultaneously sells another contract (with a different expiry) but of the same underlying

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/hedging-futures/
Hedging allows you to insulate your market position against any adverse movements in the market
When you hedge your loss in the spot market it is offset by gains in the futures market
There are two types of risk – systematic and unsystematic risk
Systematic risk is risk specific to macroeconomic events. Systematic risk can be hedged. Systematic risk is common to all stocks
Unsystematic risk is the risk associated with the company. This is unique to each company. Unsystematic risk cannot be hedge, but can be diversified
Research suggests, beyond 21 stocks unsystematic risk cannot be diversified any further
To hedge a single stock position in spot we simply have to take a counter position in the futures market. But the extent of spot value and futures value have to be same
Market beta is always +1.0
Beta measures the sensitivity of stock
Stock with Beta of less than 1 is called low beta stock
Stocks with Beta higher than 1 is called a high beta stock
One can easily estimate the stock beta in MS Excel by employing the ‘Slope’ function
To hedge a portfolio of stocks we need to follow the following steps
Calculate individual stock beta
Calculate individual weightage of each stock in the portfolio
Estimate the weighted beta of each stock
Sum up the weighted beta to get the portfolio beta
Multiply the portfolio beta with Portfolio value to get the hedge value
Divide the hedge value by Nifty Contract Value to get the number of lots
Short the required number of lots in the futures market
Remember a perfect hedge is difficult to construct, for this reason we are forced to either under hedge or over hedge.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/open-interest/
Open Interest (OI) is a number that tells you how many contracts are currently outstanding (open) in the market
OI increases when new contracts are added. OI decreases when contracts are squared off
OI does not change when there is transfer of contracts from one party to another
Unlike volumes, OI is continuous data
On a stand along basis OI and Volume information does not convey information, hence it makes sense to always pair it with the price to understand the impact of their respective variation
Abnormally high OI indicates high leverage, beware of such situations.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/call-option-basics/
Options are traded in the Indian markets for over 15 years, but the real liquidity was available only since 2006
An Option is a tool for protecting your position and reducing risk
A buyer of the call option has the right and the seller has an obligation to make delivery
The option is only given to one party in the transaction ( buyer of an option)
The option seller is also called the option writer
At the time of agreement the option buyer pays a certain amount to the option seller, this is called the ‘Premium’ amount
The agreement happens at a pre-specified price, often called the ‘Strike Price’
The option buyer benefits only if the price of the asset increases higher than the strike price
If the asset price stays at or below the strike, the buyer does not benefit, for this reason it always makes sense to buy options when you expect the price to increase
Statistically the option seller has higher odds of winning in an typical option contract
The directional view has to pan out before the expiry date, else the option will expire worthless

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/basic-option-jargons/
It makes sense to buy a call option only when one anticipates an increase in the price of an asset
The strike price is the anchor price at which both the option buyer and option writer enter into an agreement
The underlying price is simply the spot price of the asset
Exercising of an option contract is the act of claiming your right to buy the options contract at the end of the expiry
Similar to futures contract, options contract also have an expiry. Option contracts expire on the last Thursday of every month
Option contracts have different expiries – the current month, mid month, and far month contracts
Premiums are not fixed, in fact they vary based on several factors that act upon it
Options are cash settled in India.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/buying-a-call-option/
It makes sense to be a buyer of a call option when you expect the underlying price to increase
If the underlying price remains flat or goes down then the buyer of the call option loses money
The money the buyer of the call option would lose is equivalent to the premium (agreement fees) the buyer pays to the seller/writer of the call option
Intrinsic value (IV) of a call option is a non negative number
IV = Max[0, (spot price – strike price)]
The maximum loss the buyer of a call option experiences is to the extent of the premium paid. The loss is experienced as long as the spot price is below the strike price
The call option buyer has the potential to make unlimited profits provided the spot price moves higher than the strike price
Though the call option is supposed to make a profit when the spot price moves above the strike price, the call option buyer first needs to recover the premium he has paid
The point at which the call option buyer completely recovers the premium he has paid is called the breakeven point
The call option buyer truly starts making a profit only beyond the breakeven point (which naturally is above the strike price).

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/sellingwriting-a-call-option/
You sell a call option when you are bearish on a stock
The call option buyer and the seller have a symmetrically opposite P&L behaviour
When you sell a call option you receive a premium
Selling a call option requires you to deposit a margin
When you sell a call option your profit is limited to the extent of the premium you receive and your loss can potentially be unlimited
P&L = Premium – Max [0, (Spot Price – Strike Price)]
Breakdown point = Strike Price + Premium Received
In India, all options are European in nature

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-put-option-buying/
Buy a Put Option when you are bearish about the prospects of the underlying. In other words, a Put option buyer is profitable only when the underlying declines in value
The intrinsic value calculation of a Put option is slightly different when compared to the intrinsic value calculation of a call option
IV (Put Option) = Strike Price – Spot Price
The P&L of a Put Option buyer can be calculated as P&L = [Max (0, Strike Price – Spot Price)] – Premium Paid
The breakeven point for the put option buyer is calculated as Strike – Premium Paid

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-put-option-selling/
You sell a Put option when you are bullish on a stock or when you believe the stock price will no longer go down
When you are bullish on the underlying you can either buy the call option or sell a put option. The decision depends on how attractive the premium is
Option Premium pricing along with Option Greeks gives a sense of how attractive the premiums are
The put option buyer and the seller have a symmetrically opposite P&L behaviour
When you sell a put option you receive premium
Selling a put option requires you to deposit margin
When you sell a put option your profit is limited to the extent of the premium you receive and your loss can potentially be unlimited
P&L = Premium received – Max [0, (Strike Price – Spot Price)]
Breakdown point = Strike Price – Premium received

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/summarizing-call-put-options/
Buy a call option or sell a put option only when you expect the market to go up
Buy a put option or sell a call option only when you expect the market to go down
The buyer of an option has unlimited profit potential and limited risk (to the extent of the premium paid)
The seller of an option has an unlimited risk potential and limited reward (to the extent of the premium received)
Majority of options traders prefer to trade options only to capture the variation in premiums
Option premiums tend to gyrate drastically – as an options trader, and you can expect this to happen quite frequently.
Premiums vary as a function of 4 forces called the Option Greeks
Black & Sholes option pricing formula employs four forces as inputs to give out a price for the premium
Markets control the Option Greeks and the Greek’s variation itself

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/moneyness-of-an-option-contract/
The intrinsic value of an option is equivalent to the value of money the option buyer makes provided if he were to exercise the contract.
Intrinsic Value of an option cannot be negative; it is a non zero positive value.
The intrinsic value of call option = Spot Price – Strike Price
The intrinsic value of put option = Strike Price – Spot Price.
Any option that has an intrinsic value is classified as ‘In the Money’ (ITM) option.
Any option that does not have an intrinsic value is classified as ‘Out of the Money’ (OTM) option.
If the strike price is almost equal to spot price, then the option is considered as ‘At the money’ (ATM) option.
All strikes lower than ATM are ITM options (for call options)
All strikes higher than ATM are OTM options (for call options)
All strikes higher than ATM are ITM options (for Put options)
All strikes lower than ATM are OTM options (for Put options)
When the intrinsic value is very high, it is called ‘Deep ITM’ option.
Likewise, when the intrinsic value is the least, it is called ‘Deep OTM’ option.
The premiums for ITM options are always higher than the premiums for OTM option.
The Option chain is a quick visualization to understand which option strike is ITM, OTM, ATM (for both calls and puts) along with other information relevant to options.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-option-greeks-delta-part-1/
Option Greeks are forces that influence the premium of an option
Delta is an Option Greek that captures the effect of the direction of the market
Call option delta varies between 0 and 1, some traders prefer to use 0 to 100.
Put option delta varies between -1 and 0 (-100 to 0)
The negative delta value for a Put Option indicates that the option premium and underlying value moves in the opposite direction
ATM options have a delta of 0.5
ITM option have a delta of close to 1
OTM options have a delta of close to 0.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/delta-part-2/
Model Thinking helps in developing a scientifically streamlined approach to trading
The Delta changes as and when the spot value changes
As the option transitions from OTM to ATM to ITM, so does the delta
Delta hits a value of 0.5 for ATM options
Delta predevelopment is when the option transitions from Deep OTM to OTM
Delta Take off and acceleration is when the option transitions from OTM to ATM
Delta stabilization is when the option transitions from ATM to ITM to Deep ITM
Buying options in the take off stage tends to give high % return
Buying Deep ITM option is as good as buying the underlying.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/delta-part-3/
The delta is additive in nature
The delta of a futures contract is always 1
Two ATM option is equivalent to owning 1 futures contract
The options contract is not really a surrogate for the futures contract
The delta of an option is also the probability for the option to expire ITM

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/gamma-part-1/
Financial derivatives are called Financial derivatives because of its dependence on calculus and differential equations (generally called Derivatives)
Delta of an option is a variable and changes for every change in the underlying and premium
Gamma captures the rate of change of delta, it helps us get an answer for a question such as “What is the expected value of delta for a given change in underlying”
Delta is the 1st order derivative of premium
Gamma is the 2nd order derivative of premium

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/gamma-part-2/
Gamma measures the rate of change of delta.
Gamma is always a positive number for both Calls and Puts.
Large Gamma can translate to large gamma risk (directional risk)
When you buy options (Calls or Puts) you are long Gamma.
When you short options (Calls or Puts) you are short Gamma
Avoid shorting options which have a large gamma.
Delta changes rapidly for ATM option.
Delta changes slowly for OTM and ITM options.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/theta/
Option sellers are always compensated for the time risk
Premium = Intrinsic Value + Time Value
All else equal, options lose money on a daily basis owing to Theta
Time moves in a single direction hence Theta is a positive number
Theta is a friendly Greek to option sellers
When you short naked options at the start of the series you can pocket a large time value but the fall in premium owing to time is low
When you short option close to expiry the premium is low (thanks to time value) but the fall in premium is rapid

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/understanding-volatility-part-1/
Vega measures the rate of change of premium concerning the change in volatility.
Volatility is not just the up-down movement of markets.
Volatility is a measure of risk.
Volatility is estimated by the standard deviation.
Standard Deviation is the square root of the variance.
We can estimate the range of the stock price, given its volatility.
Larger the range of stock, higher is its volatility aka risk.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/volatility-calculation-historical/
Standard Deviation represents volatility, which in turn represents risk
We can use NSE website to get the daily closing prices of securities
Daily return can be calculated as log returns
Log function in excel is LN
Daily return formula = LN (Today’s Value / Yesterday’s Value) expressed as a percentage
Excel function to calculate volatility is STDEV
Standard Deviation of daily return is equivalent of daily volatility
To convert daily volatility to annual volatility multiply the daily volatility by the square root of time
Likewise to convert annual volatility to daily volatility, divide the annual volatility by the square root of time

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/volatility-normal-distribution/
The daily returns of the stock is a random walk, highly difficult to predict
The returns of the stock is normally distributed or rather close to normal distribution
In a normal distribution the data is centered around the mean and the dispersion is measured by the standard deviation
Within 1 SD we can observe 68% of the data
Within 2 SD we can observe 95% of the data
Within 3 SD we can observe 99.5% of the data
Events occurring outside the 3rd standard deviation are referred to as Black Swan events
Using the SD values we can calculate the upper and lower value of stocks/indices

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/volatility-applications/
You can use SD to identify strikes that you can write
Avoid shorting PUT options
Strikes 1 SD away offers 68% flexibility, if you need higher flexibility you could opt for 2SD
Higher the SD, higher is the range, and lower is the premium collected
Allocate capital based on your belief in asset classes. It is always advisable to invest across asset classes
It always makes sense to place SL based on daily volatility of the stock

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/vega/
Historical Volatility is measured by the closing prices of the stock/index
Forecasted Volatility is forecasted by volatility forecasting models
Implied Volatility represents the market participants expectation of volatility
India VIX represents the implied volatility over the next 30 days period
Vega measures the rate of change of premium with respect to change in volatility
All options increase in premium when volatility increases
The effect of volatility is highest when there are more days left for expiry

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/greek-interactions/
Volatility smile helps you visualize the fact that the OTM options usually have high IVs
With the help of a ‘Volatility Cone’ you can visualize today’s implied volatility with respect to past realized volatility
Gamma is high for ATM option especially towards the end of expiry
Gamma for ITM and OTM options goes to zero when we approach expiry
Delta has an effect on lower range of options around ATM when IV is low and its influence increases when volatility is high.
When the volatility is high, the far OTM options do tend to have a non zero delta value

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/greek-calculator/
The options calculator is based on the Black & Scholes model
The Black & Scholes model is used to estimate the option’s theoretical price along with the option’s Greek
The interest rate in the B&S calculator refers to the risk free rate as available on the RBI site
The implied volatility can be fetched from the option chain from the NSE website
The put call parity states that the payoff from a put option plus the spot equals the payoff from call option plus the strike.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/re-introducing-call-put-options/
Volatility plays a crucial role in your decision to buy options
In general buy options when you expect the volatility to go higher
Sell options when you expect the volatility to decrease
Besides volatility the time to expiry and the time frame during which the target is expected to be achieved also matters

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/options-m2m-and-pl/
Neither option buying nor selling entails mark to market; M2M is only for futures
Margins charged for option selling is a function of both price movement and volatility
As volatility increases, so does the option premium
Option positions closed before expiry can be generalized to the Difference between buying and selling price of premium multiplied by lot size
The option positions held to expiry are physically settled

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/bull-call-spread/
A moderate move would mean you expect a movement in the stock/index but the outlook is not too aggressive
One has to quantify ‘moderate’ by evaluating the volatility of the  stock/index
Bull Call spread is a basic spread that you can set up when the outlook is moderately bullish
Classic bull call spread involves buying ATM option and selling OTM option – all belonging to same expiry, same underlying, and equal quantity
The theta plays an important role in strike selection
The risk reward gets skewed based on the strikes you choose

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/bull-put-spread/
The Bull Put Spread is an alternative to the Bull Call Spread. Its best executed when the outlook on the market is ‘moderately bullish’
Bull Put Spread results in a net credit
The Bull Put Spread is best executed when the market has cracked, put premiums are high, the volatility is on the higher side, and you expect the market to hold up (without cracking further)
The Bull Put strategy involves simultaneously buying an OTM Put option and selling an ITM Put option
Maximum profit is limited to the extent of the net credit
Maximum loss is limited to the Spread minus Net credit
Breakeven is calculated as Higher Strike – Net Credit
One can create the spread by employing any OTM and ITM strikes
Higher the spread, higher the profit potential, and higher the breakeven point.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/call-ratio-back-spread/
The Call Ratio Backspread is best executed when your outlook on the stock/index is bullish
The strategy requires you to sell 1 ITM CE and buy 2 OTM CE, and this is to be executed in the same ratio i.e for every 1 sold option, 2 options have to be purchased
The strategy is usually executed for a ‘net Credit’
The strategy makes limited money if the stock price goes down, and unlimited profit if the stock price goes up. The loss is pre defined
There are two break even points – lower breakeven and upper breakeven points
Spread = Higher Strike – Lower Strike
Net Credit = Premium Received for lower strike – 2*Premium of higher strike
Max Loss = Spread – Net Credit
Max Loss occurs at = Higher Strike
The payoff when market goes down = Net Credit
Lower Breakeven = Lower Strike + Net Credit
Upper Breakeven = Higher Strike + Max Loss
Irrespective of the time to expiry opt for slightly ITM + Slightly OTM combination of strikes
Increase in volatility is good for this strategy when there is more time to expiry, but when there is less time to expiry, increase in volatility is not really good for this strategy.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/bear-call-ladder/
Bear Call Ladder is an improvisation over the Call Ratio Spread
Invariably the cost of executing a bear call ladder is better than the Call Ratio Spread, but the range above which the market has to move also becomes large
The Bear Call Ladder is executed by selling 1 ITM CE, buying 1 ATM CE, and 1 OTM CE
Net Credit = Premium Received from ITM CE – Premium paid to ATM & OTM CE
Max Loss = Spread (difference between the ITM and ITM options) – Net Credit
Max Loss occurs at = ATM and OTM  Strike
The payoff when market goes down = Net Credit
Lower Breakeven = Lower Strike + Net Credit
Upper Breakeven = Sum of Long strike minus short strike minus net premium
Execute the strategy only when you are convinced that the market will move significantly higher.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/synthetic-long-arbitrage/
You can use options to replicate futures payoff
A synthetic long replicates the long futures payoff
Simultaneously buying ATM call and selling ATM Put creates a synthetic long
The breakeven point for the synthetic long is the ATM strike + net premium paid
An arbitrage opportunity is created when Synthetic long + short futures yields a positive non zero P&L upon expiry
Execute the arbitrage trade only if the P&L upon expiry makes sense after accounting for expenses.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/bear-put-spread/
Spread offers visibility on risk but at the same time shrinks the reward
When you create a spread, the proceeds from the sale of an option offsets the purchase of an option
Bear put spread is best invoked when you are moderately bearish on the markets
Both the profits and losses are capped
Classic bear put spread involves simultaneously purchasing ITM put options and selling OTM put options
Bear put spread usually results in a net debit
Net Debit = Premium Paid – Premium Received
Breakeven = Higher strike – Net Debit
Max profit = Spread – Net Debit
Max Loss = Net Debit
Select strikes based on the time to expiry
Implement the strategy only when you expect the volatility to increase (especially in the 2nd half of the series)

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/bear-call-spread/
Bear call spread is best invoked when you are moderately bearish on the markets
You choose a bear call spread over a bear put spread when the call option premiums are more attractive than put options.
Both the profits and losses are capped
Classic bear call spread involves simultaneously purchasing OTM call options and selling ITM call options
Bear call spread usually results in a net credit, in fact this is another key reason to invoke a bear call spread versus a bear put spread
Net Credit = Premium Received – Premium Paid
Breakeven = Lower strike + Net Credit
Max profit = Net Credit
Max Loss = Spread – Net Credit
Select strikes based on the time to expiry
Implement the strategy only when you expect the volatility to increase (especially in the 2nd half of the series)

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/put-ratio-back-spread/
The Put Ratio Back spread is best executed when your outlook on the stock/index is bearish
The strategy requires you to sell 1 ITM PE and buy 2 OTM PE, and this is to be executed in the same ratio i.e for every 1 option sold, 2 options have to be purchased
The strategy is usually executed for a ‘Net Credit’
The strategy makes limited money if the stock price goes up, and unlimited profit when the stock price goes down
There are two break even points – lower breakeven and upper breakeven
Spread = Higher Strike – Lower Strike
Net Credit = Premium Received for Higher strike – 2*Premium paid for lower strike
Max Loss = Spread – Net Credit
Max Loss occurs at = Lower Strike
The payoff when market goes up = Net Credit
Lower Breakeven = Lower Strike – Max Loss
Upper Breakeven = Lower Strike + Max Loss
Irrespective of the time to expiry opt for ITM and OTM strike combination
Increase in volatility is good for this strategy when there is more time to expiry

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-long-straddle/
Strategies which are insulated to market direction are called ‘Market Neutral’ or ‘Delta neutral’
Market neutral strategies such as long straddle makes money either which way the market moves
Long straddle requires you to simultaneously buy the ATM Call and Put option. The options should belong to the same underlying, same strike, and same expiry
By buying the CE and PE – the trader is placing the bet on either direction
The maximum loss is equal to the net premium paid, and it occurs at the strike at which the long straddle has been initiated
The upper breakeven is ‘strike + net premium’. The lower breakeven is ‘strike – net premium’
The deltas in a long straddle adds up to zero
The volatility should be relatively low at the time of strategy execution
The volatility should increase during the holding period of the strategy
The market should make a large move – the direction of the move does not matter
The expected large move is time bound, should happen quickly – well within the expiry
Long straddles are to be set around major events, and the outcome of these events to be drastically different from the general market expectation.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-short-straddle/
Short straddle requires you to simultaneously Sell the ATM Call and Put option. The options should belong to the same underlying, same strike, and same expiry
By selling the CE and PE – the trader is placing the bet that the market wont move and would essentially stay in a range
The maximum profit is equal to the net premium paid, and it occurs at the strike at which the long straddle has been initiated
The upper breakdown is ‘strike + net premium’. The lower breakdown is ‘strike – net premium’
The deltas in a short straddle adds up to zero
The volatility should be relatively high at the time of strategy execution
The volatility should decrease during the holding period of the strategy
Short straddles can be set around major events, wherein before the event, the volatility would drive the premiums up and just after the announcement, the volatility would cool off, and so would the premiums.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-long-short-strangle/
The strangle is an improvisation over the straddle, the improvisation helps in the strategy cost reduction
Strangles are delta neutral and is insulated against any directional risk
To set up a long strangle one needs to buy OTM Call and Put option
The maximum loss in a long strangle is restricted to the extent of the premium received
The profit potential is virtually unlimited in the long strangle
The short strangle is the exact opposite of the long strangle. You are required to sell the OTM call and put option in a short strangle
The Greeks have the same effect on strangles and straddles

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/max-pain-pcr-ratio/
Option Pain theory assumes that the option writers tend to make more money consistently compared to option buyers.
Option pain assumes that option writers can influence the price of options on the day of expiry.
One can use the theory of option pain to identify the price at which the stock/index is likely to expiry.
The strike at which the option writers would experience least amount of loss is the strike at which the stock/index likely to expire.
The PCR is calculated by dividing the total open interest of Puts by the total open interest of the Calls.
The PCR is considered as a contrarian indicator.
Generally a PCR value of over 1.3 is considered bearish and a PCR value of less than 0.5 is considered bullish.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/iron-condor/
NSE’s new margin framework reduces the margin requirement for market neutral and hedged strategies
While the short strangle is an excellent strategy, it has open ends with potentially unlimited losses
The iron condor is an improvisation over the short strangle
In an iron condor, the long OTM calls and puts protect the open ends of the  short strangle
Margin required for an iron condor is far lesser compared to a short strangle

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/basics/
Filing correct Income tax return is the duty of every Indian
The Income-tax department has access to your market activity
Only 5% of Indians file Income tax returns and ~1% pay any income tax.
Financial year (FY) is the year when income was earned, Assessment year (AY) is the year you file your taxes on the income earned
The financial year is between 1st of April of the current year and 31st March of the following year
The income tax applicable to you depends on the income tax slab you belong to
The income tax slabs vary based on your age group

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/classifying-your-market-activity/
Trading F&O (Equity, currency, commodity) is considered non-speculative business
Trading intraday equity is considered speculative business
Equity holdings for more than 1 year are considered Long term capital gain (LTCG)
Equity holdings between 1 day to 1 year with a low frequency of trades is considered Short term capital gain (STCG), else in case of a high frequency of trades it should be considered as non-speculative business income
 
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/taxation-for-investors/
LTCG : Equity, Equity MF – 0% for first Rs 1lk, 10% on exceeding Rs 1lk, Debt MF: 20% after indexation benefit
STCG: Equity: 15%, Equity MF: 15%, Debt MF: as per individual tax slab
You can use the cost inflation index to determine and get the benefit from the indexed purchase value
Index purchase price = Indexed purchase value = Purchase value * (CII for the year of sale/ CII for the year of purchase)
If you have bought and sold the same shares multiple times then use FIFO methodology to calculate the holding period and Capital gains
STT is payable to the Govt and cannot be claimed as expense when investing

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/taxation-for-traders/
Speculative business income if trading intraday equity.
Non-speculative if trading F&O, or short term equity delivery actively.
Speculative losses can’t be set-off against non-speculative gains.
The advance tax has to be paid when trading as a business –15% by Jun 15th 45% by Sep 15th, 75% by Dec 15th, and 100% by Mar 15th.
Can claim all expenses if income from trading shown as a business income.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/turnover-balance-sheet-and-pl/
Audit of the books is required if turnover is more than Rs 5 Crore mark
Audit of the books is required if turnover is less than Rs 5 Crore but if the profits are less than 6% and total income more than the basic exemption limit (was 2 cr until FY 2019/20)
Audit of the books is NOT required if turnover is less than INR 5 Crore and profits higher than 6% of the turnover (was 2 cr until FY 2019/20)
Turnover does not take into consideration the regular contract turnover
Turnover refers to the business turnover
Business turnover (for trading as a business) can be calculated scrip wise or trade wise
Trade wise turnover is the most compliant way of declaring turnover.
If you are declaring trading as a business then one needs to use the ITR3 (ITR 4 until 2016) form to file tax returns
ITR3 requires you to have Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss statement along with books of account
Balance sheet equation states that Net worth = Assets – Liabilities
P&L statement details the revenues and expenses
If trading as a business maintaining 2 books of accounts becomes mandatory – Bank Book and Trade book
It is advisable to maintain and update the Balance Sheet, P&L, and books of accounts once in every quarter.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/itr-forms/
The act of paying your taxes is called “Tax Payment”, which can be done via e-payment
The act of communicating different sources of income and tax paid against that is called “Income Tax Return filing”
Filing income tax returns is mandatory, even though you have paid taxes
An ITR form should be used to file taxes
Use different ITRs for different sources of income
ITR 4S for presumptive business income. Use this to lower your cash outflow (paying taxes versus audit fees)

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/currency-basics/
The Gold Standard system of evaluating currencies existed for a long time, but eventually got phased out.
The currency inequality between currencies exists because of political and economic differences between the two countries.
By volumes, the currency markets are easily one of the largest.
The currency markets are open 24 hours, 6 days a week.
Currency is traded as pairs.
Currency Pairs have a standard format to include Base Currency and Quotation Currency.
The Base Currency is always fixed to 1 unit

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/reference-rates-impact-of-events/
The base currency is said to strengthen/appreciate against the quotation currency when it can buy more units of quotation currency.
The base currency is said to weaken/depreciate against the quotation currency when it buys lesser units of the quotation currency.
When you go long on a currency pair, you are essentially going long on the base currency and short on the quotation currency.
When you go short on a currency pair, you are essentially going short on the base currency and long on the quotation currency.
The RBI sets the reference rate of USD INR daily by conducting a poll; the ‘contributing banks’ participate in this poll.
The reference rates for other currency pairs are derived by crossing technique.
Understanding events and its impact on currencies are complicated, simply because of the currency is quoted in pairs and impact on the pair could be similar.
Eventually, the more dominating event will set the direction for the pair.
Countries with higher interest rates tend to have stringer currencies and vice versa.
Lower the trade deficit of the country; stronger is the country’s currency.
Higher inflation leads to the strengthening of currency and vice versa.
Knowing the cause and effect of events on currencies helps while trading currencies.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/impact-of-events-brexit-interest-rate-parity/
Events like Brexit tend to have an extraordinary influence on currencies.
A country whose economy is expected to suffer tends to have a weaker currency.
Forward premia are the expected spot rate over a given period.
Forward premia = S * ( 1+ Roc * N) / (1 + Rbc * N)
Interest Rate parity indicated that the forward premia are approximately equal to the spot rate plus spot times the difference in interest rate.
Future value of any currency which has a higher interest rate is at a discount to a currency which has a lower interest rate

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-usd-inr-pair/
The contract specification specs out the logistics of the USD INR derivative.
The lot size is fixed to $1,000, but this can be changed by the exchange anytime.
Expiry of the USD INR contract is 2 days before the last working day of the month. The contract can be held/traded till 12:30 PM.
Margins applicable = SPAN + Exposure, usually the margins add upto 2.25 – 2.5%.
Currency pairs are quoted upto the 4th decimal place.
A pip is the minimum price moment allowed in a currency.
Currency options are European in nature.
The premium quoted in currency options is in INR.
Strikes are available at every 25 paisa price difference.
Margins are blocked when you intend to write currency options.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-usd-inr-pair-part-2/
The classic future – spot arbitrage is not really accessible to the retail market. Hence traders tend to look at calendar spreads.
In a calendar spread you simultaneously buy and sell contracts belonging to two different expires.
A future Bull spread is when you buy near month futures and sell the further month expiry.
Futures bear spread when you sell near month futures and buy the further month expiry.
You can directly trade the spread from your trading terminal; these are called the ‘Spread contracts’
The USD INR pair tends to have lower volatility when compared to Nifty 50
The USD INR and Nifty 50 are inversely correlated

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/eur-gbp-and-jpy/
The underlying for EUR INR is the spot rate of 1 Euro in Indian Rupees.
The lot size for EUR INR is €
The underlying for GBP INR is the spot rate of 1 GBP in Indian Rupees. GBP INR is the 2nd most traded contract in the currency segment.
The lot size for GBP INR is £.
Internationally GBP USD is also referred to as the ‘Cable’.
JPY INR has the highest margin requirement in the currency segment, perhaps due to the higher volatility.
Lot size in JPY INR is 100000.
The underlying in JPY INR is the rate of 100 Japanese Yen in Indian Rupees.
As opposed to popular belief, there is no seasonality in the USD INR pair – either every week or every month.
TA can be applied to currencies just like the way it can be applied to stocks.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/gold-part-1/
Gold is one of the most popular bullion contracts that gets traded on MCX.
The gold contract comes in a few variants – Big Gold, Gold Mini, Gold Guinea, and Gold Petal.
Big Gold is the most popular contract, but requires a margin over Rs.1,25,000/-.
The P&L per tick for the big Gold is Rs.100.
P&L per tick can be calculated as = (Lot Size / Quotation) * Tick Size.
Gold Mini is the 2nd most popular Gold contract, requires a margin of roughly 15K.
Gold Petal and Guinea are other variants demanding much lower margin requirement. However, the liquidity in these contracts is quite low.
It is always a good idea to stick to the nearest month contract as liquidity is high in these contracts.
Delivery is compulsory for all these contracts; therefore, it makes sense to close these contracts at least 4 days before the expiry of the contract.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/gold-part-2/
The price of Gold if fixed twice a day in the AM & PM session in London
Only designated banks can participate in the London fix.
India too has a gold fix, similar to London fix – however, there is some circularity here as traders tend to look at the prices of MCX.
The spot price of gold in US and India differs mainly owing to the additions duties, taxes, and charges that get added in India.
Since spot prices vary, so does futures price.
Dollar and Gold are inversely related.
Commodity fundamentals are complex to understand. Hence traders tend to look at demand and supply.
Demand & supply reflects in the current price, and also manifests itself in charts.
You can apply technical analysis on Gold and other commodities

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/silver/
Gold and Silver are correlated both on an intraday basis and on an end of day basis.
Gold and Silver make a good pair for trading based on the ‘Pair trading technique’.
Silver does not have a great correlation with crude oil.
There are 4 variants of silver traded on MCX.
The main Silver contract has a lot size of 30 kgs and requires a margin close to Rs.75,000/-.
The average margin requirement for silver is roughly between 5-6% of the contract value.
Technical analysis works quite well on Silver.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/crude-oil-part-2-the-crude-oil-eco-system/
It is important to understand the Oil & Gas ecosystem and map how companies are mapped under this ecosystem.
Upstream companies are asset-heavy and are involved in extracting oil from the ground.
Increase in oil price is good for upstream companies, while a decrease is not.
Downstream companies mainly consist of refineries. Higher oil price is not good for them while lower oil prices are good (as their margins tend to increase).
Midstream companies are involved in oil and gas logistics. They prefer stability in oil prices as they do business with both upstream and downstream companies.
WTI and Brent are two variants of crude oil varying mostly in terms of API gravity and sweetness.
Brent Crude is the international benchmark.
Keeping track of inventory levels is critical. Increase in inventory tends to decrease the crude oil price, and drop inventory tends to increase the prices of crude oil.
The USD index and crude oil share an inverse correlation over longer periods. However, this relationship may break over short time frames owing to their own supply-demand dynamics.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/crude-oil-part-3-the-crude-oil-contract/
There are two crude oil contracts available – Crude Oil and Crude Oil mini.
Both the contracts vary in the lot size. Lot size of the big crude is 100 barrels while the crude mini’s lot size is 10 barrels.
Price quote is on a per-barrel basis.
Every month new crude oil contracts are introduced which expire 6 months later.
Expiry is on the 19th of every month.
The current month contract attracts maximum liquidity.
Arbitrage between the two crude contracts can be executed – but one has to ensure contract values are similar.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/copper-aluminium/
Both Copper and Aluminium are base metals.
Aluminium is found in abundance (next only to silicon and oxygen).
The demand-consumption of aluminium and copper seem to have some equilibrium.
The prices of both aluminium and copper have declined over the years.
The prices of aluminium and copper on the London Metal Exchange (LME) act as a reference price for these international commodities.
Both copper and aluminium have two contracts – the big one and mini.
The contracts vary in lot size and therefore contract values and margins.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/lead-nickel/
There are two contracts for Lead Futures; Lead and Lead Mini.
Lot size of Lead is 5000 MT, and Lead Mini is 1000 MT.
P&L per tick is Rs. 250 for Lead and Rs. 50 for Lead Mini.
‘Demand supply’ has remained stable for Lead over the last few years.
There are two contracts for Nickel futures; Nickel and Nickel Mini.
Lot size of Nickel is 250 Kgs and 100 kgs for Nickel Mini.
P&L per tick is Rs. 25 for Nickel and Rs. 10 for Nickel Mini.
Nickel production has outstripped its demand.
It is advisable to stick to the current month futures of both Lead and Nickel.
It makes sense to look at price data to place short term trades in both Lead and Nickel.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/cardamom-mentha-oil/
Agriculture as an industry contributes close to 10% to the Indian economy, but it is still the largest employer in India.
India is still very dependent on rainfall when it comes to agriculture.
There are two main rainfalls – Southwest monsoon (principal rainfall) and northeast monsoon.
Crops sowed and harvested in southwest monsoon is called Kharif. Rice is a major Kharif crop.
Crops sowed and harvested in northeast monsoon is called Rabi. Wheat is a major Rabi crop.
Agri commodities are traded till 5:00 PM on MCX.
India is the largest consumer of cardamom and 2nd largest producer of Cardamom, stands 2nd to Guatemala in production.
Demand supply for cardamom is quite stable.
MIS margin is not available for agri commodities.
Mentha oil is distilled and filtered from Mentha leaves.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/natural-gas/
Natural gas occurs naturally and is found deep underground.
Natural Gas has been in use since ancient times.
The primary use of natural gas includes power generation, heating, cooking etc.,
India is the 7th largest natural producer of natural gas.
Lot size of natural gas is 1250 MMBtu, price quote if for 100 mmBtu.
P&L per tick is Rs.125/- per tick.
Natural gas futures on MCX mimic s the price movement of Natural gas on NYMEX.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/commodity-options/
Options on commodities will be on Futures as underlying.
One cannot use the regular Black & Scholes Calculator for identifying the premium and Greeks.
Black 76 is the model used for Options on futures.
Upon exercising the option devolves into a futures position.
CTM options are two strikes above and below ATM
If a CTM option holder does not give explicit instruction, then the option is deemed worthless.
An ITM option holder can give a ‘contrary instruction’, to choose not to exercise the option. You will opt for this if you know that the position is not going to be profitable owing to taxes and applicable charges

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/cross-currency-pairs/
Cross-currency pairs are allowed to trade in NSE for the first time
Lot size of $1000 for EUR/USD, £1000 GBP/USD and $1,000 for USD/JPY
The pairs will be traded in quote currency but will be settled in Indian Rupees
Daily and Final M2M settlement will be based on the RBI reference rates.
Near month contracts will expire 2 days before the last trading day of the month at 12.30 PM

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/risk-part-1/
When you buy a stock, you are exposed to unsystemic and systemic risk.
The unsystemic risk concerning a stock is the risk that exists within the company
Unsystemic risk affects only the stock and not its peers
Unsystemic risk can be mitigated by simple diversification
Systemic risk is the risk prevalent in the system
Systemic risk is common across all stock
One can hedge to mitigate systemic risk.
No hedge is perfect – which means there is always an element of risk present while transacting in markets
The expected return is the probabilistic expectation of a return
The expected return is not a guarantee of return
The portfolio’s expected return can be calculated as – E(RP) = W1R1 + W2R2 + W3R3 + ———– + WnRn

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/risk-part-2-variance-covariance/
Variance measures the dispersion of returns over the expected average returns
Higher variance indicates higher risk, lower variance indicates lower risk
Square root of variance is standard deviation
Covariance between the returns of two stock measures how the returns of the two stocks vary
A positive covariance indicates that the returns move positively and a negative covariance indicates that while one stock returns moves up, the other comes down
Correlation measures the strength of the movement
Covariance between two stocks divided over their individual standard deviations results in a correlation between two stocks.
When we have more than 2 stocks in a portfolio, we compute the variance-covariance using a matrix

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/risk-part-3-_variance-covariance-matrix/
X is defined as an excess return matrix
Excess return matrix is simply the time series difference daily return versus the average daily return
XT is defined as the transpose of X
Variable n is defined as the number of observations in the data set. For example if you have 6 months data, n is 127, for 1 year data n would be 252
Excess return matrix is of the size n x k, where k is the number of stocks
When you divide the matrix product of XT X by n, we get the variance covariance matrix
The variance covariance matrix is of the size k x k
The covariance of stock 1 with itself is the variance of stock 1
The variance covariance matrix will lead us to the correlation matrix.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/risk-part-4-correlation-matrix-portfolio-variance/
Correlation matrix gives out the correlation between any two stocks in a portfolio
Correlation between stock A with stock B is the same as the correlation between stock B with stock A
Correlation of stock with itself is always 1
The diagonals of a correlation matrix should represent the correlation of stock A with itself
The correlation matrix contains symmetrical values above and below the diagonals

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/equity-curve/
An equity curve is a standard way to visualize the performance of a portfolio
A standard industry wide practice is to normalize the portfolio to a starting investment value of Rs.100/-
We assign weights and the respective investment to each stock
We need to calculate the daily change in investment value in each stock
The sum total of all the variation in each stock adds up to the variation of the entire portfolio
The graph of the change in daily prices of the portfolio yields the equity curve
We can look at the portfolio as a whole, as a single stock and calculate its SD
The SD of portfolio also yields the portfolio variance

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/expected-returns/
The returns of the portfolio is dependent on the weights of the individual stocks in the portfolio
The calculate the effect of an individual stock on the overall portfolio’s return, one has to multiply the average return of the stock by its weight
The overall expected return of the portfolio is grand sum of the individual stock’s returns (which is scaled by its weight)
The daily variance can be converted to annualized variance by multiplying it by square root of 252
The variance of the portfolio which we calculate is by default the 1st standard deviation value
To get the 2nd and 3rd SD, we simply have to multiply it by 2 and 3
The expected return of the portfolio can be calculated as a range
To get the range, we simply have to add and subtract the variance from the portfolio’s expected return
Each standard deviation comes with a certain confidence level. For higher confidence level, one has to look at moving higher standard deviation

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/port-opt/
The returns of the portfolio is dependent on the weights assigned to each stock
Minimum variance portfolio is that portfolio where the variance or risk is least possible for the given set of stocks
Maximum return portfolio is that portfolio where the expected portfolio returns are maximized for the given set of stocks
When we fix the variance of a portfolio we can achieve at least two portfolios where the expected portfolio returns can be maximum or least
One can optimize a given portfolio with ‘n’ number of stocks on excel, by using the solver tool
One of the most important points to remember while using solver is to ensure the data is well organized. One can do this by linking all the relevant cells and avoiding hard coding of values
You can optimize the portfolio by subjecting the variable to constrains

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/po2/
A portfolio with certain weights to each stock is considered unique
When we fix the desired level of risk, we can optimize the portfolio to yield the minimum return and maximum return portfolios
Between the min and max return portfolio (for a given fixed level of risk), we can have multiple unique portfolios
The scatter plot of risk and return gives us the efficient frontier
For a given level of risk, the best possible portfolio one can construct would lie on the efficient frontier, all other portfolios are deemed inefficient

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/var/
Events which have a very low probability of occurrence is called ‘Black Swan ’events
When a black swan event occurs, a portfolio can experience higher levels of losses
Value at Risk is one approach to estimate the worst case loss if a black swan event were to occur
We can estimate the portfolio VaR by studying the distribution of the portfolio returns
The average of the last 5% of the observation gives us the Value at Risk of the portfolio.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/position-sizing/
Position sizing forms the corner stone of a trading system
Gamblers fallacy is a bias highly applicable to the trading world. It makes the trader believe that a long streak of a certain outcome can break
When there are infinite draws, the odds of making a profit or loss on the Nth trade is similar to the odds of making the same profit or loss on the 1st trade
The recovery of capital is much more difficult task than one can imagine
Traders with small accounts have a tendency to take larger bets, which they need to avoid

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/position-sizing-active-traders-part-2/
Estimating equity capital is crucial for position sizing
Core equity model deducts the capital allocated to a trade and recalculate the capital available
Total Equity model requires you to add the free cash, margins blocked, and the P&L of the positions to estimate the equity capital
Reduced Total Equity model requires you to add the free cash to the locked in profits of an existing position

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/position-sizing-active-traders-part-3/
Estimating equity plays an important part in position sizing
Suppose you have 3 ways to estimate equity and 4 ways to position size, then essentially you have a 4 x 3 = 12 position sizing technique
Unit fixed model requires you to ascertain how many shares or lots you will trade for every ‘x’ amount of capital in your account
Unit fixed model does not consider risk
Percentage margin method requires you to define the maximum margin amount you will expose your capital to. You ideally should club this with total reduced equity model
Percentage volatility measures volatility in term or ATR.
Percentage volatility equal weights ‘volatility’ exposure to each position

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/kellys-criterion/
Percentage Risk is an easy and intuitive position sizing technique
One has to define the maximum amount of risk one as a percentage of capital, dividing this over the stop-loss gives us a sense of how much capital one should expose to a trade
Kelly’s Criterion suggests how much capital one can expose for a given trade
One can combine Kelly’s Criterion with percentage risk for optimal results

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/trading-biases/
Markets are complex, but the means to analyze markets need not be complex
Traders often complicate their charts, subconsciously it makes them think they are invincible, gives them a sense of control
Illusion of control makes you spend many hours trying to derive data, which is otherwise pointless
More data does not necessarily mean quality of information
Recency bias makes you turn a blind eye to the past events (which could have more impact on markets)
Having a sense of the overall picture helps you prevent yourself from falling prey to recency bias

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/tradingbiases-p2/
Anchoring Bias can be quite notorious – tricks the trader/investor to anchor them to the first piece of information
Anchoring Bias may lead you to miss great opportunities
Functional Fixedness fixes your opinion on the utility of the tools, restricts your imagination
One can overcome functional fixedness by practicing ‘out of the box’ thinking approach
Confirmation bias makes you seek information (or tricks you to assimilate information) which can support your original hypothesis
In a typical trading world, traders attribute losses to problems in the outside works and not really because of subpar analysis
Attribution Bias can be overcome by maintaining a trading journal

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/pair-trading-basics/
The stock prices of two companies with similar business landscape tends to make similar price moves
The prices moves can be quantified by
A local event (particular to 1 company) can create an anomaly in the price movement
When an anomaly occurs an opportunity to trade arises
In pair trading, you buy the undervalued security and sell the overvalued one
Pair trading is also called – Relative value trading or statistical arbitrage
 
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/tracking-pairs/
Spread measures the difference between the closing values of two stocks
Differentials measures the difference between the closing prices of two stock
Ratio between the two stocks essentially requires you to divide stock 1 over stock 2
Divergence is when you expect the two stocks to move apart
Convergence is when you expect the two stocks closer to each other
Correlation is like a glue which tells how tightly two stocks move together. ­­

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/pair-stats/
Care has to be taken to ensure the data is clean and adjusted for corporate actions
Close correlation is the correlation when calculated on the closing prices of stocks
The % return correlation is the correlation when calculated on the daily returns of the stock
Mean is the arithmetic average of the data series
Median is the middle observation of a data series.
If the data series has even number of observations, then the median is the average of the middle two observations
If the data series has odd number of observations, then the median is the middle observation
The mode of a data series is that value which repeats the highest number of times
The mean and median, when viewed together to each other, offers great insight into the data trend.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/pre-trade-setup/
Normal distribution plays a pivotal role in pair trading
Within the 1st standard deviation, one can observe 68% of the data
Within the 2nd standard deviation, one can observe 95% of the data
Within the 3rd standard deviation, one can observe 99.7% of the data
Standard deviation and absolute deviation measures the variability of the data
The standard deviation table gives us a sense of how the current data stands with respect to its expected variation
The cues to trade the pair either long or short comes from the standard deviation table.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-density-curve/
Ratio as a variable is more versatile as it captures the valuation elements of the stock
The ratio tends to trade above or below its mean value
The idea is the ratio, when it deviates away from the mean, will also tend to revert to mean
At every point at which the ratio deviates, we can measure the probability of its reversion to mean
The above point can be measured by normal distribution
The density curve is a non-negative value which varies between 0 and 1. This can be easily calculated on MS Excel by using an in build function.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-pair-trade/
The density curve acts as a key trigger to initiate a pair trade
A pair trade is initiated when the ratio drifts to a value between 2 and 3 standard deviation
A pair trade is closed when the ratio approaches the mean
Long pair trade requires you to buy the numerator and sell the denominator
Short pair trade requires you to sell the numerator and buy the denominator
Typically, the bulk of P&L comes from one of the stocks which have deviated away from the regular pair trade
Pair trade can be live for an extended period, but the P&L makes the wait worth it
Pair trade is a margin money guzzler.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/straight-line-equation/
A straight line equation can define the relationship between two variables
Of the two variables, one of it is dependent and the other one is independent
The slope of a straight-line equation, represented by ‘m’ helps you identify the extent by which the independent variable has to be scaled
The term ɛ represents a constant term
If the slope is zero, the Y = ɛ
Sometimes, the relationship between two variables is not obvious
When the relationship is not obvious, one can identify the relationship by employing a statistical technique called ‘Linear regression’.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/linear-regression/
Linear regression is a statistical operation which helps you construct a straight line equation
Linear regression can be performed on excel. One needs to install the excel plugin to perform linear regression
Amongst many other output variables, linear regression gives out the values of the slope and intercept
With the help of the slope and intercept, one can predict the value of y
The difference between actual y and predicted y is called the residual
The residual is also a part of the output summary

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-error-ratio/
X is the independent stock and Y is the dependent stock
The decision to figure out which stock is X and which one should be Y depends on ‘Error Ratio’
Both the slope and the intercept from the linear regression equation are estimates
Error Ratio = Standard Error of the Intercept / Standard Error
Standard error is the standard deviation of the residuals
Standard error of intercept gives you a sense of the variance of the intercept
Regress Stock 1 with Stock 2 and also Stock 2 with Stock 1, whichever offers the lowest error ratio defines which stock is dependent and which one is independent
Residuals display certain properties, studying which can help identify pair trading pattern

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-adf-test/
If two stocks move together, then they are also cointegrated
You can pair trade on stocks which are cointegrated
If the residuals obtained from linear regression is stationary, then it implies the two stocks are co-integrated
A time series is considered stationary if the series has a constant mean, constant standard deviation, and no autocorrelation
The check for stationarity can be done by an ADF test
The p-value of the ADF test should be 0.05% or lower for the series to be considered stationary.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/trade-identification/
The pair trading equation is actually the main equation which we trade
Every element of the equation is looked into
We hedge the stock price of y with the stock price of x. The beta of x tells us the number stocks required to hedge 1 stock of y
By looking into the error ratio, we are ensuring the intercept is kept low. Please remember we are not hedging the intercept, hence this needs to be kept low
The residual is what we trade as it is stationary and follows the normal distribution quite well
A long trade is initiated when residuals hit -2SD. Likewise, a short trade is initiated when the residuals hit +2SD
Long on a pair requires us to go long on Y and short on X
Short on a pair requires us to go short on Y and long on X
When we initiate a pair trade, we expect the residual to hit the mean, so we hold until then
The SL can be kept at 3SD for both long and short trades

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/live-example/
The trigger to trade a pair comes from the residual’s current value
Check for beta neutrality of the pair to identify the number of stock required in X and Y
If the beta of the pair is negative, then it may not be possible to set up the trade
Once the trade is initiated, check the z-score movement to trade its current position
The price of the futures does not really matter, the emphasis is only on the z-score

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/momentum-portfolios/
Momentum is the rate of change of return and can be measured across any time frame
A price based momentum portfolio consists of stocks which have exhibited highest momentum over the desired time frame
Tracking universe should be carefully populated. BSE 500 is a good tracking universe
Calculate the returns for the tracking universe
Rank the stocks based on highest to lowest return
The momentum portfolio is simply the top 12 or 15 stocks
The expectation is that the momentum will continue during the holding period
The asset allocation technique can vary based on backtesting Equally weighted portfolio is a good asset allocation technique
Momentum can be measured on fundamental data as well – growth in sales, EBITDA margins, EPS growth, net profit margin etc
Price based momentum works best in an upward trending market and not really in a sideways or a down trending market.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/background-and-orientation/
Personal finance is best when kept personal to oneself.
Eventually, you as an individual should be able to build a financial plan for yourself and your family
Savings early on in life makes a huge difference in the savings corpus at the end of the tenure
Time value of money plays a key role in personal finance.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/personal-finance-math-part-1/
Simple interest is the interest that gets paid only on the outstanding principal
Compound interest is paid on both interest and the principal outstanding
Interest and return are like two sides of the same coin
Absolute return is a measure of the growth in return when your investment is for less than a year
Compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) is the measure of your return when your investment duration is more than a year
Compounding works best when you give your investments enough time to grow

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/personal-finance-math-part-2/
Money today is always more valuable than money tomorrow because money today can be invested in interest-bearing instruments
The time value of money is a core concept of personal finance
Time value includes the present value and the future value of money
The present value of money helps us figure the value of a future sum in today’s terms
Present value = Future value / (1+ discount rate ) ^ (time)
The discount rate = opportunity cost + risk premium
Give a certain amount of money today, the future value of money helps us figure out its value at a future date
Future value of money and the compound interest concept works the same way
Future value = P*(1+R)^(n)
R in the above formula is the opportunity cost, whereas the R used in compound interest is the growth rate. This is the only difference between Future value and compound interest.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-retirement-problem-part-1/
Retirement is a real-life financial problem that we all need to address
Inflation complicates things. Money today is not the same as tomorrow
Inflation diminishes the purchasing power of money
Use the future value of money to estimate the worth of money today, ‘n’, many years later.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-retirement-problem-part-2/
In a multi-asset portfolio, the aggregate portfolio return is the sum product of the asset weight and the asset’s expected returns
Equity exposure is a critical component in long term wealth creation
Investing small amounts of money regularly leads to a massive retirement corpus

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/introduction-to-mutual-funds/
A fund manager is responsible for managing the mutual fund
The sponsor of the AMC is like the promoter of a mutual fund
The sponsor holds the AMC license
The sponsors appoint a trustee and AMC company
AMC is the investment manager responsible for running the mutual fund
Custodian appointed by the AMC is responsible for holding shares and other assets of the AMC
The RTA is responsible for servicing the AMC’s unitholders

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/concept-of-fund-nav/
In a mutual fund, different people invest in a collective investment vehicle with a common investment objective
Every investor in a mutual fund is treated equally in terms of percentage return
At the start of the fund activity, every investor is issued shares/units at a notional value
The value of the shares/units change based on how invested assets perform daily
 
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-mutual-fund-fact-sheet/
The factsheet of a mutual fund details all the essential parameters worth knowing about the mutual fund
The investment objective of a fund is essentially the guiding principle for the investment the fund manager makes
Open-ended funds don’t have an ‘expiry’ for the fund. It can go on forever
Close-ended funds are time-bound
Regular plans pay out distributor commissions, hence lower yield to investors
The direct plan does not pay distributor commissions; hence the returns are higher for the investor
The MF investor can choose to receive or reinvest the dividends
Riskometer is a self-assessment of risk by the AMC
 
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-equity-scheme-part-1/
Large-cap stocks – 1st to 100th company in terms of full market capitalization
Mid-cap stocks – 101st to 250th company in terms of full market capitalization
Small-cap stocks – 250th company onwards in terms of full market capitalisation
Large-cap funds should contain at least 80% in large-cap stocks. Large-cap funds are expected to have lower volatility and steady returns
Mid-cap and small-cap funds have higher volatility and return expectation compared to the large-cap funds
Mid and large-cap stocks contain at least 35% each of mid and large-cap stocks.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/equity-scheme-part-2/
A multi-cap fund does not have any restrictions on where it can invest. The manager invests in any stocks across market caps (large, mid, and small) where he sees opportunities.
One of the risks to watch out for in a multi-cap fund is the ‘fund manager risk.’
A focused fund consists of not more than 30 stocks in its portfolio. These are high conviction bets by the fund manager
The risk and return of a focused fund is higher compared to any other equity oriented fund
A dividend yield fund does not mean the fund pays regular dividends to its investors
The dividend yield fund invests in high dividend-yielding stocks
ELSS funds are tax saving funds under section 80C of the Indian Income Tax act 1961
A maximum tax saving of 1,50,000/- is permitted when investing in ELSS funds
An ELSS fund is considered a proxy for a multi-cap fund

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-debt-funds-part-1/
When a corporate entity borrows funds (for more than one year), they do so by issuing bonds
Corporate borrowings for less than a year is done via the issuance of a commercial paper or the CPs
When the Government borrows, they do so by issuing a treasury bill or the T-Bill
Against the borrowing, the borrower pays interest (coupon) to the lender
The lender faces multiple risks when lending funds to the borrower
Credit risk and interest rate risk is the primary risk for the lender
Liquid funds invest only in CPs and T bills with a maximum maturity of 91 days
Liquid fund is not a proxy for a savings bank account; it carries credit risk.
 
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-debt-funds-part-2/
Overnight funds invest in debt instruments with a 24hr settlement cycle
Almost all overnight funds invest in Tri party repo
The performance across overnight funds is similar
Macaulay Duration of a fund gives us a sense of how long it takes for the fund to get back its invested amount
Ultra-short duration fund has a Macaulay duration between 3 to 6 months
Ultrashort duration funds are also risky

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-debt-funds-part-3/
Bond yields and bond prices are inversely proportional
Interest rate and bond prices are inversely proportional
Modified duration helps us understand the change in NAV of the fund (in the context of debt fund) for every 1% change in interest rate
Low duration fund has credit risk, but low-interest rate risk
Money market fund has credit risk, but low interest rate risk
Short and medium duration fund has both credit and interest rate risk
Debt investors have to factor in liquidity risk along with credit and interest rate risk
 
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-debt-funds-part-4/
A debt fund investor should watch out for liquidity risk
The cash borrowings of a fund is an indicator of liquidity risk
The Banking and PSU debt funds invest predominantly in banking/financial services, and PSU debt
The banking and PSU debt carries less credit risk (relatively) compared to its peers
Credit risk fund carries a high degree of credit risk. A retail investor is better off avoiding this fund
GILTS don’t have credit risk but have a significant amount of interest rate risk
 
https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/investing-in-bonds/
In a tax-free bond, the coupons are tax-free
PSU debt carries an implicit sovereign guarantee, and hence very low credit risk
The coupon is paid as a percentage of the face value
YTM of a bond is the effective yield the bondholder experiences
The bond buyer pays accrued interest to the bond seller

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/arbitrage-funds/
Arbitrage funds are hedged position
SEBI mandates AMCs to invest a minimum of 65% in arbitrage strategies
Mutual funds usually spend up to 35% in debt
Arbitrage funds can be volatile
One can consider Arbitrage funds as a proxy for low/short duration funds

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/measuring-mutual-fund-returns/
For lumpsum investments less than one year, use absolute return
For SIP investments less than one year, use absolute return
For lumpsum investments over a year use CAGR
For SIP investments over a year, use XIRR
CAGR is the growth rate of an investment
XIRR is a modified form of CAGR
CAGR and XIRR are same for lumpsum investments over 1 year

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/rolling-returns/
Point to point return gives a perspective of the return only for the two days under consideration 
Point to point return should not be taken as a generalization of return 
The rolling return gives a better perspective of the return
Rolling return average is a better representation of the returns one can expect

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/mutual-fund-expense-ratio-direct-and-regular-plans/
Investment in Mutual fund is not free; there is a fee applicable.
The applicable fee is called the ‘Total Expense Ratio’ or simply the expense ratio
The TER is expressed as an annual percentage charged
The TER is charged daily
The NAV that is declared is post TER deduction
For a given fund, TER for the direct plan is lesser compared to the regular plan
For a given fund, the NAV for the regular plan is always lesser compared to the direct plan

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/mutual-benchmarking/
Benchmarks help you get a perspective of performance.
Most mutual funds benchmark themselves against TRI, which is the total returns index.
TRI captures the effect of dividends.
The returns of the index largely depend on the weights assigned to each of the index constituents.
TRI returns of Nifty 50, and Nifty 500 is mostly similar.
You need to set realistic return expectation and set that as a benchmark.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/mutual-fund-risk-metrics/
Beta measures the relative risk of the fund compared to its benchmark
Higher the beta, higher is the relative risk
Beta is not an indicator of the inherent risk of the fund
Alpha is the excess return over and above the benchmark return on a risk-adjusted basis
Higher the beta, lower is the alpha and vice versa
The standard Deviation measures the riskiness of the fund. Higher the SD, higher is the volatility of the fund
Sharpe ratio measures the unit of return earned for every unit of risk undertaken
Higher the Sharpe ratio, better is the fund.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/sortino-and-the-capture-ratios/
Sharpe ratio measures the return per unit of risk by considering both the positive and negative returns
Sortino’s modifies the Sharpe ratio and includes just the downside risk
Upside capture ratio gives you an estimate of how much of the Index’s upside the fund has captured
Downside capture ratio gives you an estimate of how much of the Index’s downside returns the fund has captured.
Look for consistency in capture ratio

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/how-to-analyse-an-equity-mutual-fund/
You can start the equity mutual fund research with a basic hygiene check to familiarize yourself with the fund
Know the size of the AUM, its investment objectives, a bit about the fund manager, and its benchmark
Look for the rolling returns of the fund on 3,5 and 10-year basis.
Look for the average, minimum, and the maximum returns to get a sense of the dispersion of the return
Compare the rolling returns with its benchmark rolling returns
If there is excess return, check if this is coming at the cost of additional risk
Look for the risk-reward matrix and understand the risk-reward profile on 5 and 10 years basis
Check the capture ratios

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/how-to-analyze-a-debt-mutual-fund/
The investment in a mutual fund should align with the financial goal
Debt mutual funds carry credit risk, interest risk, and change in credit rating risk
The minimum time duration to invest in a debt fund should be at least equal to the average maturity of the fund
It is important to analyze the debt fund’s portfolio
Higher the exposure to corporate bonds, higher is the credit risk
Sovereign bonds do not carry credit risk but do carry interest rate risk
One should be concerned about large exposure to a single corporate entity
One can look at YTM as the measure of risk
It is best to avoid debt funds with large and small AUMs

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/the-mutual-fund-portfolio/
The first step in personal finance is to ensure you have health and term insurance
2nd most important aspect is to ensure you have an emergency corpus
The financial goal is defined by the amount of corpus required and the time frame available to accumulate the corpus
One of the easier ways to build a mutual fund portfolio is by using the method of elimination
Always use a conservative approach and tone down your return expectations
Try and avoid having multiple funds of the same subcategory, have a minimum non-overlapping portfolio instead
A common goal for all us to have a retirement corpus
Once a portfolio is set, a yearly review of the funds is more than sufficient
Do not over complicate mutual fund portfolio construct

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/smart-beta-funds/
The idea with this chapter was to give you a working understanding of smart beta and factor investing. I think you need to dive deeper if you wish to allocate to these funds. There are some amazing resources on factor investing, and a cursory Google will surface them. Please dive deeper before investing in these funds.
Smart beta is just a marketing term. There is no smart beta or dumb beta.
Smart-beta funds are nothing but factor funds or funds that have alternatively weighted indices unlike Nifty 50 which is market-cap-weighted
The live performance of factor funds can be different than the indices.
Factors can be highly cyclical, and individual factors can underperform simple diversified funds or index funds for decades.
If you want to invest in factor funds, diversification among factors is an important consideration.
Investing based on the past performance of factors is a terribly bad idea.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/asset-allocation-an-introduction/
One cannot avoid buying assets.
Know the different type of assets, and the factors drive their returns.
Draw-up an asset-allocation strategy (KISS: Keep It Simple, Stupid!)
Stick to the allocation strategy because prediction is impossible.
Nothing works all the time. The world around you changes. Be pragmatic.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/exchange-traded-funds-etf/
ETFs trade real-time on the stock exchanges and you can now set-up SIPs in ETFs to invest every month
Blindly choosing an ETF is a bad idea. ETF due diligence before investing is extremely important
ETF liquidity is an issue in India because our markets are still small and this needs to be kept in mind when buying and selling
Always use limit orders and compare the market price of the ETF with the intraday or indicative NAV (iNAV) before buying and selling
You can check the iNAV on the respective AMC’s website
Sometimes the iNAVs on AMC sites may be wrong. If the difference between iNAV and the price is huge, it’s a red flag.
Compare the ETF price with the underlying index or check with the AMC in cases where the ETF prices are way off from the iNAVs/NAVs
Large-cap and mid-cap Index ETFs make a lot of sense vs actively managed large-cap and mid-cap index funds

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/basics-of-macro-economics/
The country’s GDP represents the country’s collective economic output; this includes all the goods and services produced within the country’s geographic boundary.
The nominal GDP growth rate is the GDP’s absolute growth rate; it does not adjust for inflation.
The real GDP growth rate adjusts for inflation.
With 2.6 to 2.9 Trillion USD, India’s GDP stands at 5th/6thposition in the global GDP rank.
As the GDP of the country expands, the market cap also tends to expand.
India Inc’s revenue consists of tax and non-tax revenue.
India, Inc’s expense consists of revenue and capital expenditure.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/introduction-to-financial-modelling/
A financial model takes in inputs in the form of financial statements and gives us an output mainly in terms of valuations
Financial modelling involves a non-sequential learning path
Multiple discussion threads open up while building a financial model
Basic working knowledge of MS Excel, Balance Sheet, P&L, cashflow is mandatory before venturing into financial modelling
There are 7-8 steps to follow while building a financial model
The model that we build has to be flexible to accommodate changes and updates.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/excel-workbook-setup/
Pick a company that is easy to model (at least in your initial days of financial modelling)
The manufacturing sector is slightly better to model compared to the services sector
Look for reporting consistency in the annual report
Do not blindly copy data from the annual report onto the excel sheet
Set up your excel sheet before you can copy the data
Ensure your excel sheet is consistent

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/historical-data/
Perform an annual report recce before setting up the excel sheet
It makes sense to take the latest year’s financial statement for the format; the chances are that you will cover all the line items. But this is only a hack
Indexing helps in quick navigation
Differentiate between fact and assumption data points. You can do this by colour coding
Maintain format hygiene across the sheet
If need be, breakdown the heavy line to get a better granular view

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/assumptions-part-1/
Please pay attention to model integrity, as it helps you identify accurate cell linkages
One can calculate the historical trends either as a growth rate or by taking a simple ratio
Projections are made by taking averages or by making an intelligent guess
It is best when the historical trends exhibit a non-volatile range
Assumptions are an art form; there is no standard method to make assumptions. Your guess is as good as mine.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/assumptions-part-2/
Deferred tax is as a percentage of depreciation
Converting inventory data from Rupee value to the number of days helps us develop unique perspectives into the functioning of the business
Likewise, with the Receivable data
A detailed revenue model gives granular insights into the revenue pattern of a company
All line items belonging to P&L and Balance sheet are assumed in the assumptions sheet. A schedule is built for the items which cant be assumed directly
Specific schedules give us granular insights into the specific line item

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/revenue-model/
The revenue model is a sub-model within your primary model
You can build complex revenue models by starting with simple common sense questions
All the data needed to make a revenue model is usually available in the annual report of the company
Use the revenue model to extract other information like capacity utilization, CAPEX cycles, and industry market share.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/asset-schedule/
As per the base rule, the closing balance for year 1 is the opening balance for year 2. We use base rule across many schedules in a financial model
Gross block includes all the assets that the company owns; usually, the gross block number is a heavyweight on the asset side
Capital expenditure or the CAPEX of a company includes all funds spent on acquiring new assets or maintaining assets
Asset schedule helps us extract the CAPEX numbers from the gross block number
To project the CAPEX, ideally, one should look at what the management has to say
Other CAPEX projections techniques include the averages and the variable method.

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/asset-schedule-part-2/
Accumulated depreciation stated in the balance sheet is on a cumulative basis.
The current year depreciation stated in the P&L is for the year only
You can use the method of proportions to forecast the depreciation for the year
You can apply the base rule to forecast the accumulated depreciation
Netblock = Gross block – accumulated depreciation

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/debt-schedule/
Debt can be secured or unsecured
The balance sheet gives us the overall debt; associated notes give us the split between secured and unsecured loan
We can calculate the average of opening and closing balance across secured and unsecured loans to get the average loan
The best way to project debt is by understanding the management’s view on CAPEX
If there is no management guideline, its best to keep debt at the same level

https://zerodha.com/varsity/chapter/reserves-schedule-part-1/
Think of the authorized share capital of the company as the overall approved shares a company can issue
For new equity issues (over and above the authorized share capital), the company must increase the authorized share capital.
Share capital stated in the balance sheet is the fully paid-up share capital of the company.
Dividing the share capital by the face value of the shares gives us the total number of shares.
The security premium reserve of the company is the excess of funds available over and above the share capital.
The security premium reserve increases when the company raises fresh Equity.
General Reserves of the company is earmarked for business operations of a company without any specific purpose.
The bottom line of the company, i.e. the PAT, flows into the retained earnings section of the Reserves, and that’s one way the P&L and the Balance sheet are connected.
Dividends and dividend distribution tax gets paid out from the retained earnings.